18       Chapter 2 Network implementation models




2.1 Protocols
Section 2.1.1 describes the transport protocol TCP and the IP routing protocol. These two examples are
used to provide an abstract model of a protocol and its functions in Section 2.1.2. Section 2.1.3 ends
with common network performance assumptions. Readers familiar with TCP/IP may wish to skip to
Section 2.1.2.


2.1.1 Transport and routing protocols
Applications subcontract the job of reliable delivery to a transport protocol such as the Transmission
Control Protocol (TCP). TCP’s job is to provide the sending and receiving applications with the illusion
of two shared data queues in each direction—despite the fact that the sender and receiver machines
are separated by a lossy network. Thus whatever the sender application writes to its local TCP send
queue should magically appear in the same order at the local TCP receive queue at the receiver, and
vice versa. TCP implements this mechanism by breaking the queued application data into segments
and retransmitting each segment until an acknowledgment (ack) has been received. A more detailed
description of TCP operation can be found in Section A.1.1.
    If the application is (say) a videoconferencing application that does not want reliability guarantees,
it can choose to use a protocol called UDP (User Datagram Protocol) instead of TCP. Unlike TCP, UDP
does not need acks or retransmissions because it does not guarantee reliability.
    Transport protocols such as TCP and UDP work by sending segments from a sender node to a
receiver node across the Internet. The actual job of sending a segment is subcontracted to the Internet
routing protocol IP.
    Internet routing is broken into two conceptual parts, called forwarding and routing. Forwarding is
the process by which packets move from source to destination through intermediate routers. A packet
is a TCP segment together with a routing header that contains the destination Internet address.
    While forwarding must be done at extremely high speeds, the forwarding tables at each router must
be built by a routing protocol, especially in the face of topology changes, such as link failures. There are
several commonly used routing protocols, such as distance vector (e.g., RIP), link state (e.g., OSPF),
and policy routing (e.g., BGP). More details and references to other texts can be found in Section A.1.2
in Appendix.


2.1.2 Abstract protocol model
A protocol is a state machine for all nodes participating in the protocol, together with interfaces and
message formats. A model for a protocol state machine is shown in Fig. 2.1. The specification must
describe how the state machine changes state and responds (e.g., by sending messages, setting timers)
to interface calls, received messages, and timer events.
    For instance, when an application makes a connect request, the TCP sender state machine initializes
by picking an unused initial sequence number, goes to the so-called SYN-SENT state, and sends a
SYN message. As a second example, a link-state routing protocol like OSPF has a state machine at
each router; when a link state packet (LSP) arrives at a router with a higher sequence number than the
last LSP from the source, the new LSP should be stored and sent to all neighbors. While the LSP is very
different from TCP, both protocols can be abstracted by the state machine model shown in Fig. 2.1.
                                                                                        2.1 Protocols            19




FIGURE 2.1
Abstract model of the state machine implementing a protocol at a node participating in a protocol.




FIGURE 2.2
Common protocol functions. The small shaded black box to the lower left represents the state table used by the
protocol.


    This book is devoted to protocol implementations. Besides TCP and IP, this book will consider other
protocols, such as HTTP. Thus, it is worth abstracting out the generic and time-consuming functions
that a protocol state machine performs based on our TCP and routing examples. Such a model, shown
in Fig. 2.2, will guide us through this book.
    First, at the bottom of Fig. 2.2, a protocol state machine must receive and send data packets. This
involves data manipulations, or operations that must read or write every byte in a packet. For instance,
a TCP must copy received data to application buffers, while a router has to switch packets from input
links to output links. The TCP header also specifies a checksum that must be computed over all the data
bytes. Data copying also requires the allocation of resources such as buffers.
    Second, at the top of Fig. 2.2, the state machine must demultiplex data to one of many clients. In
some cases, the client programs must be activated, requiring potentially expensive control transfer. For
instance, when a receiving TCP receives a Web page, it has to demultiplex the data to the Web browser
application using the port number fields and may have to wake up the process running the browser.
20       Chapter 2 Network implementation models



    Fig. 2.2 also depicts several generic functions shared by many protocols. First, protocols have a
crucial state that must be looked up at high speeds and sometimes manipulated. For instance, a received
TCP packet causes TCP to look up a table of connection state, while a received IP packet causes IP
to look up a forwarding table. Second, protocols need to efficiently set timers, for example, to con-
trol retransmission in TCP. Third, if a protocol module is handling several different clients, it needs
to schedule these clients efficiently. For instance, TCP must schedule the processing of different con-
nections, while a router must make sure that unruly conversations between some pair of computers do
not lock out other conversations. Many protocols also allow large pieces of data to be fragmented into
smaller pieces that need reassembly.
    One of the major theses of this book is that though such generic functions are often expensive, their
cost can be mitigated with the right techniques. Thus each generic protocol function is worth studying in
isolation. Therefore after Part 1 of this book, the remaining chapters address specific protocol functions
for endnodes and routers.


2.1.3 Performance environment and measures
This section describes some important measures and performance assumptions. Consider a system
(such as a network or even a single router) where jobs (such as messages) arrive and, after completion,
leave. The two most important metrics in networks are throughput and latency. Throughput roughly
measures the number of jobs completed per second. Latency measures the time (typically the worst
case) to complete a job. System owners (e.g., ISPs, routers) seek to maximize throughput to maximize
revenues, while users of a system want end-to-end latencies lower than a few hundred milliseconds.
Latency also affects the speed of computation across the network, as, for example, in the performance
of a remote procedure call.
    The following performance-related observations about the Internet milieu are helpful when consid-
ering implementation trade-offs.
• Link Speeds: Backbone links are upgrading to 10 Gbps and 40 Gbps, and local links are upgrading
  to gigabit speeds. However, wireless and home links are currently orders of magnitude slower.
• TCP and Web Dominance: Web traffic accounts for over 70% of traffic in bytes or packets. Similarly,
  TCP accounts for 90% of traffic in a recent study (Braun, 1998).
• Small Transfers: Most Web documents accessed are small; for example, a SPEC (Carlton, 1996)
  study shows that 50% of accessed files are 50 kilobytes (KB) or less.
• Poor Latencies: Real round-trip delays exceed speed-of-light limitations; measurements in Crovella
  and Carter (1995) report a mean of 241 msec across the United States compared to speed-of-light
  delays of less than 30 msec. Increased latency can be caused by efforts to improve throughput, such
  as batch compression at modems and pipelining in routers.
• Poor Locality: Backbone traffic studies (Thompson et al., 1997) show 250,000 different source–
  destination pairs (sometimes called flows) passing through a router in a very short duration. More
  recent estimates show around a million concurrent flows. Aggregating groups of headers with the
  same destination address or other means does not reduce the number of header classes significantly.
  Thus locality, or the likelihood of computation invested in a packet being reused on a future packet,
  is small.
• Small Packets: Thompson et al. (1997) also show that roughly half the packets received by a router
  are minimum-size 40-byte TCP acknowledgments. To avoid losing important packets in a stream
