                                                                    2.4 Operating systems             43



anisms of page table mapping and demand paging. Both these mechanisms are crucial to understand in
order to optimize data transfer costs in an endnode.
    Any virtual address must be mapped to a physical memory address. The easiest mapping is to use
an offset into physical memory. For example, a virtual array of 15,000 locations could be mapped into
physical memory from, say, 12,000 to 27,000. This has two disadvantages. First, when the program
runs, a block of 15,000 contiguous locations has to be found. Second, the programmer is limited to
using a total memory equal to the size of physical memory.
    Both problems can be avoided by a mapping based on table lookup. Since it takes too much memory
to implement a mapping from any virtual location to any physical location, a more restricted mapping
based on pages is used. Thus for any virtual address, let us say that the high-order bits (e.g., 20 bits)
form the page number and that the low-order bits (e.g., 12 bits) form the location within a page. All
locations within a virtual page are mapped to the same relative location, but individual virtual pages
can be mapped to arbitrary locations. Main memory is also divided into physical pages, such that every
group of 212 memory words is a physical page.
    To map a virtual into a physical address, the corresponding virtual page (i.e., high-order 20 bits) is
mapped to a physical page number while retaining the same location within the page. The mapping is
done by looking up a page table indexed by the virtual page number. A virtual page can be located on
any physical memory page. More generally, some pages (e.g., Virtual Page 2 in Fig. 2.13) may not be
memory resident and can be marked as being on disk. When such a page is accessed, the hardware will
generate an exception and cause the operating system to read the page from the disk page into a main
memory page. This second mechanism is called demand paging.
    Together, page mapping and demand paging solve the two problems of storage allocation and
bounded memory allocations. Instead of solving the harder variable size storage allocation problem,
the OS needs only to keep a list of fixed size free pages and to assign some free pages to a new pro-
gram. Also, the programmer can work with an abstraction of memory whose size is bounded only by
the size of the disk and the number of instruction address bits.
    The extra mapping can slow down each instruction considerably. A Read to virtual location X may
require two main memory accesses: a page table access to translate X to physical address P , followed
by a Read to address P . Modern processors get around this overhead by caching the most recently used
mappings between virtual and physical addresses in a translation look-aside buffer (TLB), which is
a processor-resident cache. The actual translation is done by a piece of hardware called the memory
management unit (MMU), as shown in Fig. 2.8.
    The page table mapping also provides a mechanism for protection between processes. When a
process makes a Read to virtual location X, unless there is a corresponding entry in the page table, the
hardware will generate a page fault exception. By ensuring that only the operating system can change
page table entries, the operating system can ensure that one process cannot read from or write to the
memory of another process in an unauthorized fashion.
    While router forwarding works directly on physical memory, all endnode and server networking
code works on virtual memory. While virtual memory is a potential cost (e.g., for TLB misses), it
also reflects a possible opportunity. For example, it offers the potential for packet copying between the
operating system and the application (see Example 8) to be done more efficiently by manipulating page
tables. This idea is explored further in Chapter 5.
44        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.14
The programmer sees devices as disparate as a disk and a network adaptor as pieces of memory that can be read and
written using system calls, but in reality, the kernel manages a host of device-specific details.



2.4.3 Simple I/O via system calls
Having an application programmer be aware of the variety and complexity of each I/O device would
be intolerable. Thus operating systems provide the programmer with the abstraction of the devices as a
piece of memory (Fig. 2.14) that can be read and written.
     The code that maps from a simple I/O interface call to the actual physical Read (with all parameters
filled in) to the device is called a device driver. If abstraction were the only concern, the device driver
code could be installed in a library of commonly available code that can be “checked out” by each
application. However, since devices such as disks must be shared by all applications, if applications
directly control the disk, an erroneous process could crash the disk. Instead, secure operating system
design requires that only the buggy application fail.
     Thus it makes sense for the I/O calls to be handled by device drivers that are in a secure portion of
the operating system that cannot be affected by buggy processes. This secure portion, called the kernel,
provides a core of essential services, including I/O and page table updates, that applications cannot be
trusted to perform directly.
     Thus when a browser such as Netscape wants to make a disk access to read a Web page, it must make
a so-called system call across the application–kernel boundary. System calls are a protected form of a
function call. The hardware instruction is said to “trap” to a more privileged level (kernel mode), which
allows access to operating system internals. When the function call returns after the I/O completes, the
application code runs at normal privilege levels. A system call is more expensive than a function call
because of the hardware privilege escalation and the extra sanitizing checks for incorrect parameter
values. A simple system call may take a few microseconds on modern machines.
     The relevance to networking is that when a browser wishes to send a message over the network (e.g.,
Process 2 in Fig. 2.14), it must do a system call to activate TCP processing. A few microseconds for
a system call may seem small, but it is really very high overhead on a fast Pentium. Can applications
speed up networking by bypassing the system call? If so, does OS protection get tossed out of the
window? Answers to these tantalizing questions are postponed to Chapter 6.
                                                                                   2.6 Exercises               45




2.5 Summary
This chapter is best sampled based on the reader’s needs. Structurally, the chapter works its way through
four abstraction levels that affect performance: hardware, architecture, operating systems, and proto-
cols. Viewing across abstraction levels is helpful because packet-processing speeds can be limited by
transistor paths implementing packet processing, by architectural limits such as bus speeds, by OS ab-
straction overheads such as system calls, and finally, even by protocol mechanisms. Several examples,
which look ahead to the rest of the book, were described to show that performance can be improved by
understanding each abstraction level.
    Designers that consider all four abstraction levels for each problem will soon be lost in detail.
However, there are a few important performance issues and major architectural decisions for which
simultaneous understanding of all abstraction levels is essential. For example, the simple models given
in this chapter can allow circuit designers, logic designers, architects, microcoders, and software pro-
tocol implementors to work together to craft the architecture of a world-class router. They can also
allow operating system designers, algorithm experts, and application writers to work together to design
a world-class Web server. As link speeds cross 40 Gbps, such interdisciplinary teams will become even
more important. This need is alluded to by Raymond Kurzweil in a different context (Kurzweil, 2001):
   There’s another aspect of creativity. We’ve been talking about great individual contributors, but when
   you’re creating technology it’s necessarily a group process, because technology today is so complex
   that it has to be interdisciplinary . . . And they’re all essentially speaking their own languages, even
   about the same concepts. So we will spend months establishing our common language . . . I have a
   technique to get people to think outside the box: I’ll give a signal-processing problem to the linguists,
   and vice versa, and let them apply the disciplines in which they’ve grown up to a completely different
   problem. The result is often an approach that the experts in the original field would never have thought
   of. Group process gives creativity a new dimension.
   With fields like hardware implementation and protocol design replacing signal processing and lin-
guistics, Kurzweil’s manifesto reflects the goal of this chapter.



2.6 Exercises
1. TCP Protocols and Denial-of-Service Attacks: A common exploit for a hacker is to attempt to
   bring down a popular service, such as Yahoo, by doing a denial-of-service (DOS) attack. A simple
   DOS attack that can be understood using the simple TCP model of Fig. A.1 is TCP Syn-Flooding.
   In this attack, the hacker sends a number of SYN packets to the chosen destination D (e.g., Yahoo)
   using randomly chosen source addresses. D sends back a SYN-ACK to the supposed source S
   and waits for a response. If S is not an active IP address, then there will be no response from S.
   Unfortunately, state for S is kept in a pending connection queue at D until D finally times out S. By
   periodically sending bogus connection attempts pretending to be from different sources, the attacker
   can ensure that the finite pending connection queue is always full. Thereafter, legitimate connection
   requests to D will be denied.
   • Assume there is a monitor that is watching all traffic. What algorithm can be used to detect
     denial-of-service attacks? Try to make your algorithm as fast and memory-efficient as possible
46        Chapter 2 Network implementation models



     so that it can potentially be used in real-time, even in a router. This is a hard problem, but even
     starting to think about the problem is instructive.
   • Suppose the monitor realizes a TCP flood attack is underway. Why might it be hard to distinguish
     between legitimate traffic and flood traffic?
2. Digital Design: Multiplexers and barrel shifters are very useful in networking hardware, so working
   on this problem can help even a software person to build up hardware intuition.
   • First, design a 2-input multiplexer from basic gates (AND, OR, NOT).
   • Next, generalize the idea shown in the chapter to design an N -input multiplexer from N/2 input
     multiplexers. Use this to describe a design that takes log N gate delays and O(N ) transistors.
   • Show how to design a barrel shifter using a reduction to multiplexers (i.e., use as many muxes as
     you need in your solution). Based on your earlier solutions, what are the gate and time complex-
     ities of your solution?
   • Try to design a barrel shifter directly at the transistor level. What are its time and transistor
     complexities? You can do better using direct design than the simple reduction earlier.
3. Thermometer Encoding: Spell out the digital logic of the following 4-bit-input digital-to-analog
   converter (a.k.a. thermometer encoding), a wider slight variant of which is used in Fig. 2.4 for
   generating an N -bit mask. The inputs are i1 (the least significant bit), i2 , i3 , and i4 . The outputs are
   j1 , j2 , · · · , j15 . If the binary number (i4 i3 i2 i1 )2 has value k, then j1 = j2 = · · · = jk = 1 and the rest
   is 0. You need to spell out the formula for each jl (1 ≤ l ≤ 15) as a logic function of the inputs.
   Please use notations ∨ (for OR), ∧ (for AND), and ¬ (for NOT).
4. Memory Design: For the design of the pipelined flow ID lookup scheme described earlier, draw the
   timing diagrams for the pipelined lookups. Use the numbers described in the chapter, and clearly
   sketch a sample binary tree with 15 leaves and show how it can be looked up after four lookups on
   four different banks. Assume a binary tree, not a ternary tree. Also, calculate the number of keys that
   can be supported using 16 banks of RAMBUS if the first k levels of the tree are cached in on-chip
   SRAM.
5. Memories and Pipelining Trees: This problem studies how to pipeline a heap. A heap is important
   for applications like QoS, where a router wishes to transmit the packet with the earliest timestamp
   first. Thus it makes sense to have a heap ordered on timestamps. To make it efficient, the heap needs
   to be pipelined in the same fashion as the binary search tree example in the chapter, though doing so
   for a heap is somewhat harder. Fig. 2.15 shows an example of a P-heap capable of storing 15 keys.
   A P-heap (Bhagwan and Lin, 2000) is a full binary tree, such as a standard heap, except that nodes
   anywhere in the heap can be empty as long as all children of the node are also empty (e.g., nodes 6,
   12, 13).
       For the following explanations consult Fig. 2.15 and Fig. 2.16. Consider adding key 9 to the heap.
   Assume every node N has a count of the number of empty nodes in the subtree rooted at N . Since
   9 is less than the root value of 16, 9 must move below. Since both the left and right children have
   empty nodes in their subtrees, we arbitrarily choose to add 9 to the left subtree (node 2). The index,
   value, and position values shown on the left of each tree are registers used to show the state of the
   current operation. Thus in Fig. 2.15, part (b), when 9 is added to the left subtree, the index represents
   the depth of the subtree (depth 2) and the position is the number of the node (i.e., node 2) that the
   value 9 is being added to.
                                                                                       2.6 Exercises            47




FIGURE 2.15
An enqueue example in five snapshots to be read from left to right and then top-down. In each snapshot, the index
represents the depth of the subtree, and the position is the number of the node that the value is being added to.



      Next, since 9 is less than 14 and since only the right child has space in its subtree, 9 is added to
   the subtree rooted at node 5. This time 9 is greater than 7, so 7 is replaced with 9 (in node 5) and 7 is
   pushed down to the empty node, 10. Thus in Fig. 2.15, part (d), the index value is 4 (i.e., operation is
   at depth 4) and the position is 10. Although in Fig. 2.15 only one of the registers at any index/depth
   has nonempty information, keeping separate registers for each index will allow pipelining.
      Consider next what is involved in removing the largest element (dequeue). Remove 16 and try to
   push down the hole created until an empty subtree is created. Thus in Step 3, the hole is moved to
   node 2 (because its value, 14, is larger than its sibling, with value 10), then to node 4, and finally to
48      Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.16
Dequeue example.


   node 9. Each time a hole is moved down, the corresponding nonempty value from below replaces
   the old hole.
   • In order to make the enqueue operation work correctly, the count of empty subtree nodes must be
     maintained. Explain briefly how the count should be maintained for each enqueue and dequeue
     operation (the structure will be pipelined in a moment, so make sure the count values respect this
     goal).
   • A logical thing to do is to pipeline by level, as we did for the binary tree in the chapter. However,
     here we have a problem. At each level (say, inserting 9 at the root), the operation has to consult
     the two children at the next level as well. Thus when the first operation moves down to level 2,
                                                                               2.6 Exercises          49



       one cannot bring in a second operation to level 1 or there will be memory contention. Clearly,
       waiting till one operation finishes completely will work, but this reduces to sequential processing
       of operations. What is the fastest rate you can pipeline the heap?
   •   Consider the operations “Enqueue 9; Enqueue 4.5; Dequeue” pipelined as you have answered
       earlier. Show six consecutive snapshots of the tree supporting these three operations.
   •   Assume that each level memory is an on-chip SRAM that takes 5 nsec for a memory access.
       Assume that you can read and write the value and count fields together in one access. Remember
       that some of the memories can be queried in parallel. What is the steady-state throughput of the
       heap, in operations per second?
   •   Could one improve the number of memory references by using a wider memory access and laying
       out the tree appropriately?
   •   Before this design, previous designs used a memory element for each heap element as well as
       logic for each element. Thus the amount of logic required scaled directly with heap size, which
       scales poorly in terms of density and power. In this design, the memory scales with the number
       of heap elements and thus scales with SRAM densities and power, but the logic required scales
       much better. Explain.
6. Architecture, Caches, and Fast Hash Functions: The L1 cache in a CPU provides essentially
   a fast hash function that maps from a physical memory address to its contents via the L1 cache.
   Suppose that one wants to teach an old dog (the L1 cache) a new trick (to do IP lookups) using a
   method suggested in Chiueh and Pradhan (1999). The goal is to use the L1 cache as a hash table to
   map 32-bit IP addresses to 7-bit port numbers. Assume a 16-KB L1 cache, of which the first 4 KB
   are reserved for the hash table, and a 32-byte cache block size. Assume a byte-addressable machine,
   a 32-bit virtual address, and a page size of 4 KB. Thus there are 512 32-byte blocks in the cache.
   Assume the L1 cache is directly indexed (called direct mapped). Thus bits 5 through 13 of a virtual
   address are used to index into one of 512 blocks, with bits 0 through 4 identifying the byte within
   each block.
   • Given pages of size 4 KB and that the machine is byte addressable, how many bits in a virtual
     address identify the virtual page? How many bits of the virtual page number intersect with bits 5
     through 13 used to index into the L1 cache?
   • The only way to ensure that the hash table is not thrown out of the L1 cache when some other
     virtual pages arrive is to mark any pages that could map into the same portion of the L1 cache
     as uncacheable at start-up (this can be done). Based on your previous answer and the fact that
     the hash table uses the first 4 KB of L1 cache, precisely identify which pages must be marked as
     uncacheable.
   • To do a lookup of a 32-bit IP address, first convert the address to a virtual address by setting to
     0 all bits except bits 5 through 11 (bits 12 and 13 are zero because only the top quarter of the
     L1 cache is being used). Assume this is translated to the exact same physical address. When a
     Read is done to this address, the L1 cache hardware will return the contents of the first 32-bit
     word of the corresponding cache block. Each 32-bit word will contain a 25-bit tag and a 7-bit
     port number. Next, compare all bits in the IP address, other than bits 5 through 11, with the tag,
     and keep doing so for each 32-bit entry in the block. How many L1 cache accesses are required
     in the worst case for a hash lookup? Why might this be faster than a standard hash lookup in
     software?
50      Chapter 2 Network implementation models



7. Operating Systems and Lazy Receiver Processing: Example 8 described how BSD protocol pro-
   cessing can lead to receiver livelock. Lazy receiver processing (Druschel and Banga, 1996) combats
   this problem via two mechanisms.
   • The first mechanism is to replace the single shared IP processing queue by a separate queue per
     destination socket. Why does this help? Why might this not be easy to implement?
   • The second mechanism is to implement the protocol processing at the priority of the receiving
     process and as part of the context of the received process (and not a separate software interrupt).
     Why does this help? Why might this not be easy to implement?
                                                                                                          CHAPTER


Fifteen implementation principles
                                                                                                              3
                        Instead of computing, I had to think about the problem, a formula for success that I recommend
                                                                                                                 highly.
                                                                                                     —Ivan Sutherland


After understanding how queens and knights move in a game of chess, it helps to understand basic
strategies, such as castling and the promotion of pawns in the endgame. Similarly, having studied some
of the rules of the protocol implementation game in the last chapter, you will be presented in this chapter
with implementation strategies in the form of 15 principles. The principles are abstracted from protocol
implementations that have worked well. Many good implementors unconsciously use such principles.
The point, however, is to articulate such principles so that they can be deliberately applied to craft
efficient implementations.
    This chapter is organized as follows. Section 3.1 motivates the use of the principles using a ternary
CAM problem. Section 3.2 clarifies the distinction between algorithms and algorithmics using a net-
work security forensics problem. Section 3.3 introduces 15 implementation principles; Section 3.4
explains the differences between implementation and design principles. Finally, Section 3.5 describes
some cautionary questions that should be asked before applying the principles.

    Quick reference guide
    The reader pressed for time should consult the summaries of the 15 principles found in Figs. 3.1–3.3. Two networking
    applications of these principles can be found in a ternary CAM update problem (Section 3.1) and a network security
    forensics problem (Section 3.2).




3.1 Motivating the use of principles—updating ternary
    content-addressable memories
Call a string ternary if it contains characters that are either 0, 1, or *, where * denotes a wildcard that
can match both a 0 and a 1. Examples of ternary strings of length 3 include S1 = 01* and S2 = *1*;
the actual binary string 011 matches both S1 and S2, while 111 matches only S2. A ternary content-
addressable memory (CAM) is a memory containing ternary strings of a specified length together with
associated information; when presented with an input string, the CAM will search all its memory loca-
tions in parallel to output (in one cycle) the lowest memory location whose ternary string matches the
specified input key.
Network Algorithmics. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-809927-8.00008-7
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                                       51
52       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles




FIGURE 3.1
Summary of Principles 1–5—systems thinking.




FIGURE 3.2
Summary of Principles 6–10—recovering efficiency while retaining modularity.



   Fig. 3.4 shows an application of ternary CAMs to the longest-matching prefix problem for Internet
routers. For every incoming packet, each Internet router must extract a 32-bit destination IP address
from the incoming packet and match it against a forwarding database of IP prefixes with their corre-
sponding next hops. An IP prefix is a ternary string of length 32 where all the wildcards are at the end.
We will change notation slightly and let * denote any number of wildcard characters, so 101* matches
10100 and not just 1010.
                                                        3.1 Motivating the use of principles        53




FIGURE 3.3
Summary of Principles 11–15—speeding up key routines.




FIGURE 3.4
Example of using a ternary CAM for prefix lookups.


    Thus in Fig. 3.4 a packet sent to a destination address that starts with 010001 matches the prefixes
010001* and 01* but should be sent to Port P5 because Internet forwarding requires that packets be
forwarded using the longest match. We will have more to say about this problem in Chapter 11. For now,
note that if the prefixes are arranged in a ternary CAM such that all longer prefixes occur before any
shorter prefixes (as in Fig. 3.4), the ternary CAM provides the matching next hop in one memory cycle.
    While ternary CAMs are extremely fast for message forwarding, they require that longer prefixes
occur before shorter prefixes. But routing protocols often add or delete prefixes. Suppose in Fig. 3.4
that a new prefix, 11*, with next hop Port 1 must be added to the router database. The naive way to do
insertion would make space in the group of length-2 prefixes (i.e., create a hole before 0*) by pushing
up by one position all prefixes of length 2 or higher.
    Unfortunately, for a large database of around 100,000 prefixes kept by a typical core router, this
would take 100,000 memory cycles, which would make it very slow to add a prefix. We can obtain a
54        Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles




FIGURE 3.5
Finding a spot for the new prefix by moving X to Y ’s position recursively requires us to find a spot to move Y .



better solution systematically by applying the following two principles (described later in this chapter
as principles P13 and P15).

Understand and exploit degrees of freedom
In looking at the forwarding table on the left of Fig. 3.4 we see that all prefixes of the same length are
arranged together and all prefixes of length i occur after all prefixes of length j > i. However, in the
figure all prefixes of the same length are also sorted by value. Thus 00* occurs before 01*, which occurs
before 10*. But it is unnecessary for the CAM to correctly return longest matching prefixes: We only
require ordering between prefixes of different lengths; we do not require ordering between prefixes of
the same length.
    In looking at the more abstract view of Fig. 3.4 shown in Fig. 3.5, we see that if we are to add an
entry to the start of the set of length-i prefixes, we have to create a hole at the end of the length-(i + 1)
set of prefixes. Thus we have to move the entry X, already at this position, to another position. If we
move X one step up, we will be forced into our prior inefficient solution.
    However, our observation about degrees of freedom says that we can place X anywhere adjacent to
the other length-(i + 1) prefixes. Thus, an alternative idea is to move X to the position held by Y , the
last length-(i + 2) prefix. But this forces us to find a new position for Y . How does this help? We need
a second principle.

Use algorithmic techniques
Again, recursion suggests itself: We solve a problem by reducing the problem to a “smaller” instance
of the same problem. In this case, the new problem of assigning Y a new position is “smaller” because
the set of length-(i + 2) prefixes is closer to the free space at the top of the CAM than the set of length-
(i + 1) prefixes. Thus we move Y to the end of the length-(i + 3) set of prefixes, etc.
    While recursion is a natural way to think, a better implementation is to unwind the recursion by
starting from the top of the CAM and working downward by creating a hole at the end of the length-1
                                                                  3.2 Algorithms versus algorithmics                          55



prefixes,1 creating a hole at the end of the length-2 prefixes, etc., until we create a hole at the end of the
length-i prefixes. Thus the worst-case time is 32 − i memory accesses, which is around 32 for small i.
    Are we done? No, we can do better by further exploiting degrees of freedom. First, in Fig. 3.5 we
assumed that the free space was at the top of the CAM. But the free space could be placed anywhere. In
particular, it can be placed after the length-16 prefixes. This reduces the worst-case number of memory
accesses by a factor of 2 (Shah and Gupta, 2001).
    A more sophisticated degree of freedom is as follows. So far, the specification of the CAM insertion
algorithm required that “a prefix of length i must occur before a prefix of length j if i > j .” Such
a specification is sufficient for correctness but is not necessary. For example, 010* can occur before
111001* because there is no address that can match both prefixes!
    Thus a less exacting specification is “if two prefixes P and Q can match the same address, then P
must come before Q in the CAM if P is longer than Q.” This is used in Shah and Gupta (2001) to
further reduce the worst-case number of memory accesses for insertion for some practical databases.
    While the last improvement is not worth its complexity, it points to another important principle. We
often divide a large problem into subproblems and hand over the subproblem for a solution based on a
specification. For example, the CAM hardware designer may have handed over the update problem to
a microcoder, specifying that longer prefixes be placed before shorter ones.
    But, as before, such a specification may not be the only way to solve the original problem. Thus
changes to the specification (principle P3) can yield a more efficient solution. Of course, this requires
curious and confident individuals who understand the big picture or who are brave enough to ask dan-
gerous questions.



3.2 Algorithms versus algorithmics
It may be possible to argue that the previous example is still essentially algorithmic and does not
require system thinking. One more quick example will help clarify the difference between algorithms
and algorithmics.

Security forensics problem
In many intrusion detection systems, a manager often finds that a flow (defined by some packet header,
for example, a source IP address) is likely to be misbehaving based on some probabilistic check. For
example, a source doing a port scan may be identified after it has sent 100,000 packets to different
machines in the attacked subnet.
    While there are methods to identify such sources, one problem is that the evidence (the 100,000
packets sent by the source) has typically disappeared (i.e., been forwarded from the router) by the time
the guilty source is identified. The problem is that the probabilistic check requires accumulating some
state (in, say, a suspicion table) for every packet received over some period of time before a source can
be deemed suspicious. Thus if a source is judged to be suspicious after 10 seconds, how can one go
back in time and retrieve the packets sent by the source during those 10 seconds?


1 For simplicity, this description has assumed that the CAM contains prefixes of all lengths; it is easy to modify the algorithm to
avoid this assumption.
56        Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles




FIGURE 3.6
Keeping a queue of the last 100,000 packets that contains forensic information about what suspicious flows have
been sent in the past.


    To accomplish this, in Fig. 3.6 we keep a queue of the last 100,000 packets that were sent by the
router. When a packet is forwarded, we also add a copy of the packet (or just keep a pointer to the
packet) to the head of the queue. To keep the queue bounded, when the queue is full, we delete from
the tail as well.
    The main difficulty with this scheme is that when a guilty flow is detected, there may be lots of
the flow’s packets in the queue (Fig. 3.6). All of these packets must be placed in the forensic log for
transmission to a manager. The naive method of searching through a large DRAM buffer is very slow.
    The textbook algorithms approach would be to add some index structure to search quickly for flow
IDs. For example, one might maintain a hash table of flow IDs that maps every flow to a list of pointers
to all packets with that flow ID in the queue. When a new packet is placed in the queue, the flow ID is
looked up in the hash table and the address of the new packet in the queue is placed at the end of the
flow’s list. Of course, when packets leave the queue, their entries must be removed from the list, and
the list can be long. Fortunately, the entry to be deleted is guaranteed to be at the head of the queue for
that flow ID.
    Despite this, the textbook scheme has some difficulties. It adds more space to maintain these extra
queues per flow ID, and space can be at a premium for a high-speed implementation. It also adds some
extra complexity to packet processing to maintain the hash table and requires reading out all of a flow’s
packets to the forensic log before the packet is overwritten by a packet that arrives 100,000 packets
later. Instead, the following “systems” solution may be more elegant.

Solution
Do not attempt to immediately identify all of a flow F ’s packets when F is identified, but lazily identify
them as they reach the end of the packet queue. This is shown in Fig. 3.7. When we add a packet to the
head of the queue, we must remove a packet from the end of the queue (at least when the queue is full).
             3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description                                 57




FIGURE 3.7
Keeping a queue of the last 100,000 packets that contains forensic information about what suspicious flows have
been sent in the past.



    If that packet (say, Q, see Fig. 3.6) belongs to flow F that is in the Suspicion Table and flow F has
reached some threshold of suspicion, we then add packet Q to the forensic log. The log can be sent
to a manager. The overhead of this scheme is significant but manageable; we have to do two packet-
processing steps, one for the packet being forwarded and one for the packet being removed from the
queue. But these two packet-processing steps are also required in the textbook scheme; on the other
hand, the elegant scheme requires no hashing and uses much less storage (no pointers between the
100,000 packets).



3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description
The two earlier examples and the warm-up exercise in Chapter 1 motivate the following 15 principles,
which are used in the rest of the book. They are summarized inside the front cover. To add more
structure, they are categorized as follows:
• Systems Principles: Principles 1–5 take advantage of the fact that a system is constructed from
  subsystems. By taking a systemwide rather than a black-box approach, one can often improve per-
  formance.
• Improving Efficiency While Retaining Modularity: Principles 6–10 suggest methods for improv-
  ing performance while allowing complex systems to be built modularly.
• Speeding It Up: Principles 11–15 suggest techniques for speeding up a key routine considered by
  itself.
58       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



    Amazingly, many of these principles have been used for years by Chef Charlie at his Greasy Spoon
restaurant. This chapter sometimes uses illustrations drawn from Chef Charlie’s experience, in addition
to computer systems examples. One networking example is also described for each principle, though
details are deferred to later chapters.


3.3.1 Systems principles
The first five principles exploit the fact that we are building systems.

P1: Avoid obvious waste in common situations
In a system, there may be wasted resources in special sequences of operations. If these patterns occur
commonly, it may be worth eliminating the waste. This reflects an attitude of thriftiness toward system
costs.
    For example, Chef Charlie has to make a trip to the pantry to get the ice cream maker to make ice
cream and to the pantry for a pie plate when he makes pies. But when he makes pie à la mode, he has
learned to eliminate the obvious waste of two separate trips to the pantry.
    Similarly, optimizing compilers look for obvious waste in terms of repeated subexpressions. For
example, if a statement calculates i = 5.1 ∗ n + 2 and a later statement calculates j := (5.1 ∗ n + 2) ∗ 4,
the calculation of the common subexpression 5.1 ∗ n + 2 is wasteful and can be avoided by computing
the subexpression once, assigning it to a temporary variable t, and then calculating i := t and j := t ∗ 4.
A classic networking example, described in Chapter 5, is avoiding making multiple copies of a packet
between the operating system and user buffers.
    Notice that each operation (e.g., walk to pantry, line of code, single packet copy) considered by
itself has no obvious waste. It is the sequence of operations (two trips to the pantry, two statements
that recompute a subexpression, two copies) that have obvious waste. Clearly, the larger the exposed
context, the greater the scope for optimization. While the identification of certain operation patterns as
being worth optimizing is often a matter of designer intuition, optimizations can be tested in practice
using benchmarks.

P2: Shift computation in time
Systems have an aspect in space and time. The space aspect is represented by the subsystems, possibly
geographically distributed, into which the system is decomposed. The time aspect is represented by
the fact that a system is instantiated at various time scales, from fabrication time to compile time to
parameter-setting times to run time. Many efficiencies can be gained by shifting computation in time.
Here are three generic methods that fall under time-shifting.
• P2a: Precompute. This refers to computing quantities before they are actually used, to save time at
  the point of use. For example, Chef Charlie prepares crushed garlic in advance to save time during
  the dinner rush. A common systems example is table-lookup methods, where the computation of an
  expensive function f in run time is replaced by the lookup of a table that contains the value of f
  for every element in the domain of f . A networking example is the precomputation of IP and TCP
  headers for packets in a connection; because only a few header fields change for each packet, this
  reduces the work to write packet headers (Chapter 9).
• P2b: Evaluate Lazily. This refers to postponing expensive operations at critical times, hoping that
  either the operation will not be needed later or a less busy time will be found to perform the opera-
             3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description                               59




FIGURE 3.8
Easing the implementation of Subsystem 1 by weakening its specification from S to, say, W , at the cost of making
Subsystem 2 do more work.


  tion. For example, Chef Charlie postpones dishwashing to the end of the day. While precomputation
  is computing before the need, lazy evaluation is computing only when needed.
  A famous example of lazy evaluation in systems is copy-on-write in the Mach operating system. Sup-
  pose we have to copy a virtual address space A to another space, B, for process migration. A general
  solution is to copy all pages in A to B to allow for pages in B to be written independently. Instead,
  copy-on-write makes page table entries in B’s virtual address space point to the corresponding page
  in A. When a process using B writes to a location, then a separate copy of the corresponding page in
  A is made for B, and the write is performed. Since we expect the number of pages that are written
  in B to be small compared to the total number of pages, this avoids unnecessary copying.
  A simple networking example occurs when a network packet arrives at an endnode X in a different
  byte order than X’s native byte order. Rather than swap all bytes immediately, it can be more efficient
  to wait to swap the bytes that are actually read.
• P2c: Share Expenses. This refers to taking advantage of expensive operations done by other parts
  of the system. An important example of expense sharing is batching, where several expensive op-
  erations can be done together more cheaply than doing each separately. For example, Charlie bakes
  several pies in one batch. Computer systems have used batch processing for years, especially in the
  early days of mainframes, before time sharing. Batching trades latency for throughput. A simple
  networking example of expense sharing is timing wheels (Chapter 7), where the timer data structure
  shares expensive per-clock-tick processing with the routine that updates the time-of-day clock.

P3: Relax system requirements
When a system is first designed top-down, functions are partitioned among subsystems. After fixing
subsystem requirements and interfaces, individual subsystems are designed. When implementation dif-
ficulties arise, the basic system structure may have to be redone, as shown in Fig. 3.8.
    As shown in Chapter 1, implementation difficulties (e.g., implementing a divide) can sometimes be
solved by relaxing the specification requirements for, say, Subsystem 1. This is shown in the figure by
weakening the specification of Subsystem 1 from, say, S to W , but at the cost of making Subsystem 2
obey a stronger property, Q, compared to the previous property, P .
    Three techniques that arise from this principle are distinguished by how they relax the original
subsystem specification.
60        Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



• P3a: Trade Certainty for Time. Systems designers can fool themselves into believing that their
  systems offer deterministic guarantees, when in fact we all depend on probabilities. For example,
  quantum mechanics tells us there is some probability that the atoms in your body will rearrange
  themselves to form a hockey puck, but this is clearly improbable.2 This opens the door to consider
  randomized strategies when deterministic algorithms are too slow.
  In systems, randomization is used by millions of Ethernets worldwide to sort out packet-sending
  instants after collisions occur. A simple networking example of randomization is Cisco’s NetFlow
  traffic measurement software: If a router does not have enough processing power to count all arriving
  packets, it can count random samples and still be able to statistically identify large flows. A second
  networking example is stochastic fair queuing (Chapter 14), where, rather than keep track exactly
  of the networking conversations going through a router, conversations are tracked probabilistically
  using hashing.
• P3b: Trade Accuracy for Time. Similarly, numerical analysis cures us of the illusion that comput-
  ers are perfectly accurate. Thus it can pay to relax accuracy requirements for speed. In systems,
  many image compression techniques, such as MPEG, rely on lossy compression using interpolation.
  Chapter 1 used approximate thresholds to replace divides by shifts. In networking, some packet-
  scheduling algorithms at routers (Chapter 14) require sorting packets by their departure deadlines;
  some proposals to reduce sorting overhead at high speeds suggest approximate sorting, which can
  slightly reduce quality-of-service bounds but reduce processing.
• P3c: Shift Computation in Space. Notice that all the examples given for this principle relaxed re-
  quirements: Sampling may miss some packets, and the transferred image may not be identical to the
  original image. However, other parts of the system (e.g., Subsystem 2 in Fig. 3.8) have to adapt to
  these looser requirements. Thus we prefer to call the general idea of moving computation from one
  subsystem to another (“robbing Peter to pay Paul”) shifting computation in space. In networking, for
  example, the need for routers to fragment packets has recently been avoided by having end systems
  calculate a packet size that will pass all routers.

P4: Leverage off system components
A black-box view of system design is to decompose the system into subsystems and then to design
each subsystem in isolation. While this top-down approach has a pleasing modularity, in practice
performance-critical components are often constructed partially bottom-up. For example, algorithms
are designed to fit the features offered by the hardware. Here are some techniques that fall under this
principle.
• P4a: Exploit Locality. Chapter 2 showed that memory hardware offers efficiencies if related data
  is laid out contiguously, e.g., same sector for disks, or same DRAM page for DRAMs. Disk-search
  algorithms exploit this fact by using search trees of high radix, such as B-trees. IP-lookup algorithms
  (Chapter 11) use the same trick to reduce lookup times by placing several keys in a wide word, as
  did the example in Chapter 1.
• P4b: Trade Memory for Speed. The obvious technique is to use more memory, such as lookup tables,
  to save processing time. A less obvious technique is to compress a data structure to make it more
  likely to fit into cache, because cache accesses are cheaper than memory accesses; in this case,


2 Quote due to Tony Lauck.
              3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description                                            61



  both memory and speed may be improved. The Lulea IP-lookup algorithm described in Chapter 11
  uses this idea by using sparse arrays that can still be looked up efficiently using space-efficient
  bitmaps.
• P4c: Exploit Hardware Features. Compilers use strength reduction to optimize away multipli-
  cations in loops; for example, in a loop where addresses are 4 bytes and the index i increases
  by 1 each time, instead of computing 4 ∗ i, the compiler calculates the new array index as be-
  ing 4 higher than its previous value. This exploits the fact that multiplies are more expensive
  than additions on many modern processors. Similarly, it pays to manipulate data in multiples of
  the machine word size, as we will see in the fast IP-checksum algorithms described in Chap-
  ter 9.
    If this principle is carried too far, the modularity of the system will be in jeopardy. Two techniques
alleviate this problem. First, if we exploit other system features only to improve performance, then
changes to those system features can only affect performance and not correctness. Second, we use this
technique only for system components that profiling has shown to be a bottleneck.

P5: Add hardware to improve performance
When all else fails, goes the aphorism, use brute force. Adding new hardware,3 such as buying a faster
processor, can be simpler and more cost effective than using clever techniques. Besides the brute-force
approach of using faster infrastructure (e.g., faster processors, memory, buses, links), there are cleverer
hardware–software trade-offs. Since hardware is less flexible and has higher design costs, it pays to add
the minimum amount of hardware needed.
    Thus baking at the Greasy Spoon was sped up using microwave ovens. In computer systems, dra-
matic improvements each year in processor speeds and memory densities suggest doing key algorithms
in software and upgrading to faster processors for speed increases. But computer systems abound with
cleverer hardware–software trade-offs.
    For example, in a multiprocessor system, if a processor wishes to write data, it must inform any
“owners” of cached versions of the data. This interaction can be avoided if each processor has a piece
of hardware that watches the bus for write transactions by other processors and automatically inval-
idates the cached location when necessary. This simple hardware snoopy cache controller allows the
remainder of the cache-consistency algorithm to be efficiently performed in software.
    Decomposing functions between hardware and software is an art in itself. Hardware offers several
benefits. First, there is no time required to fetch instructions: Instructions are effectively hardcoded.
Second, common computational sequences (which would require several instructions in software) can
be done in a single hardware clock cycle. For example, finding the first bit set in, say, a 32-bit word
may take several instructions on a RISC machine but can be computed by a simple priority encoder, as
shown in the previous chapter.
    Third, hardware allows you to explicitly take advantage of parallelism inherent in the problem.
Finally, hardware manufactured in volume may be cheaper than a general-purpose processor. For ex-
ample, a Pentium may cost $100, while an ASIC in volume with similar speeds may cost $10.


3 By contrast, Principle P4 talks about exploiting existing system features, such as the existing hardware. Of course, the distinc-
tion between principles tends to blur and must be taken with a grain of salt.
62       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



    On the other hand, a software design is easily transported to the next generation of faster chips.
Hardware, despite the use of programmable chips, is still less flexible. Despite this, with the advent of
design tools such as VHDL synthesis packages, hardware design times have decreased considerably.
Thus in the last few years chips performing fairly complex functions, such as image compression and
IP lookups, have been designed.
    Besides specific performance improvements, new technology can result in a complete paradigm
shift. A visionary designer may completely redesign a system in anticipation of such trends. For exam-
ple, the invention of the transistor and fast digital memories certainly enabled the use of digitized voice
in the telephone network.
    Increases in chip density have led computer architects to ponder what computational features to add
to memories to alleviate the processor-memory bottleneck. In networks, the availability of high-speed
links in the 1980s led to the use of large addresses and large headers. Ironically, the emergence of
laptops in the 1990s led to the use of low-bandwidth wireless links and to a renewed concern for header
compression. Technology trends can seesaw!
    The following specific hardware techniques are often used in networking ASICs and are worth
mentioning. They were first described in Chapter 2 and are repeated here for convenience.
• P5a: Use Memory Interleaving and Pipelining. Similar techniques are used in IP lookup, in classi-
  fication, and in scheduling algorithms that implement QoS. The multiple banks can be implemented
  using several external memories, a single external memory such as a RAMBUS, or on-chip SRAM
  within a chip that also contains processing logic.
• P5b: Use Wide Word Parallelism. A common theme in many networking designs, such as the
  Lucent bit vector scheme (Chapter 12), is to use wide memory words that can be processed in
  parallel. This can be implemented using DRAM and exploiting page mode or by using SRAM and
  making each memory word wider.
• P5c: Combine DRAM and SRAM. We have explained in Chapter 2 and will explain in Chapter 16
  two clever applications of this principle.


3.3.2 Principles for modularity with efficiency
An engineer who had read Dave Clark’s classic papers (e.g., Clark [1985]) on the inefficiencies of
layered implementations once complained to a researcher about modularity. The researcher (Radia
Perlman) replied, “But that’s how we got to the stage where we could complain about something.” Her
point, of course, was that complex systems like network protocols could only have been engineered
using layering and modularity. The following principles, culled from work by Clark and others, show
how to regain efficiencies while retaining modularity.

P6: Create efficient specialized routines by replacing inefficient general-purpose routines
As in mathematics, the use of abstraction in computer system design can make systems compact, or-
thogonal, and modular. However, at times the one-size-fits-all aspect of a general-purpose routine leads
to inefficiencies. In important cases, it can pay to design an optimized and specialized routine.
    A systems example can be found in database caches. Most general-purpose caching strategies would
replace the least recently used record to disk. However, consider a query-processing routine processing
a sequence of database tuples in a loop. In such a case, it is the most recently used record that will be
used furthest in the future, so it is the ideal candidate for replacement. Thus many database applications
             3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description                                       63



replace the operating system caching routines with more specialized routines. It is best to do such spe-
cialization only for key routines, to avoid code bloat. A networking example is the fast UDP processing
routines that we describe in Chapter 9.

P7: Avoid unnecessary generality
The tendency to design abstract and general subsystems can also lead to unnecessary or rarely used
features. Thus, rather than building several specialized routines (e.g., P6) to replace the general-purpose
routine, we might remove features to gain performance.4
    Of course, as in the case of P3, removing features requires users of the routine to live with re-
strictions. For example, in RISC processors, the elimination of complex instructions such as multiplies
required multiplication to be emulated by firmware. A networking example is provided by Fbufs (Chap-
ter 5), which provides a specialized virtual memory service that allows efficient copying between virtual
address spaces.

P8: Don’t be tied to reference implementations
Specifications are written for clarity, not to suggest efficient implementations. Because abstract speci-
fication languages are unpopular, many specifications use imperative languages such as C. Rather than
precisely describe what function is to be computed, one gets code that prescribes how to compute the
function. This has two side effects.
    First, there is a strong tendency to overspecify. Second, many implementors copy the reference
implementation in the specification, which is a problem when the reference implementation was chosen
for conceptual clarity and not efficiency. As Clark (1985) points out, implementors are free to change
the reference implementation as long as the two implementations have the same external effects. In
fact, there may be other structured implementations that are efficient as well as modular.
    For example, Charlie knows that when a recipe tells him to cut beans and then to cut carrots, he can
interchange the two steps. In the systems world, Clark originally suggested the use of upcalls (Clark,
1985) for operating systems. In an upcall, a lower layer can call an upper layer for data or advice, seem-
ingly violating the rules of hierarchical decomposition introduced in the design of operating systems.
Upcalls are commonly used today in network protocol implementations.

P9: Pass hints in module interfaces
A hint is information passed from a client to a service that, if correct, can avoid expensive computation
by the service. The two key phrases are passed and if correct. By passing the hint in its request, a
service can avoid the need for the associative lookup needed to access a cache. For example, a hint can
be used to supply a direct index into the processing state at the receiver. Also, unlike caches, the hint is
not guaranteed to be correct and hence must be checked against other certifiably correct information.
Hints improve performance if the hint is correct most of the time.
    This definition of a hint suggests a variant in which information is passed that is guaranteed to be
correct and hence requires no checking. For want of an established term, we will call such information
a tip. Tips are harder to use because of the need to ensure the correctness of the tip.


4 Butler Lampson, a computer scientist and Turing Award winner, provides two quotes: When in doubt, get rid of it (anonymous)
and Exterminate Features (Thacker).
