20       Chapter 2 Network implementation models



    Fig. 2.2 also depicts several generic functions shared by many protocols. First, protocols have a
crucial state that must be looked up at high speeds and sometimes manipulated. For instance, a received
TCP packet causes TCP to look up a table of connection state, while a received IP packet causes IP
to look up a forwarding table. Second, protocols need to efficiently set timers, for example, to con-
trol retransmission in TCP. Third, if a protocol module is handling several different clients, it needs
to schedule these clients efficiently. For instance, TCP must schedule the processing of different con-
nections, while a router must make sure that unruly conversations between some pair of computers do
not lock out other conversations. Many protocols also allow large pieces of data to be fragmented into
smaller pieces that need reassembly.
    One of the major theses of this book is that though such generic functions are often expensive, their
cost can be mitigated with the right techniques. Thus each generic protocol function is worth studying in
isolation. Therefore after Part 1 of this book, the remaining chapters address specific protocol functions
for endnodes and routers.


2.1.3 Performance environment and measures
This section describes some important measures and performance assumptions. Consider a system
(such as a network or even a single router) where jobs (such as messages) arrive and, after completion,
leave. The two most important metrics in networks are throughput and latency. Throughput roughly
measures the number of jobs completed per second. Latency measures the time (typically the worst
case) to complete a job. System owners (e.g., ISPs, routers) seek to maximize throughput to maximize
revenues, while users of a system want end-to-end latencies lower than a few hundred milliseconds.
Latency also affects the speed of computation across the network, as, for example, in the performance
of a remote procedure call.
    The following performance-related observations about the Internet milieu are helpful when consid-
ering implementation trade-offs.
• Link Speeds: Backbone links are upgrading to 10 Gbps and 40 Gbps, and local links are upgrading
  to gigabit speeds. However, wireless and home links are currently orders of magnitude slower.
• TCP and Web Dominance: Web traffic accounts for over 70% of traffic in bytes or packets. Similarly,
  TCP accounts for 90% of traffic in a recent study (Braun, 1998).
• Small Transfers: Most Web documents accessed are small; for example, a SPEC (Carlton, 1996)
  study shows that 50% of accessed files are 50 kilobytes (KB) or less.
• Poor Latencies: Real round-trip delays exceed speed-of-light limitations; measurements in Crovella
  and Carter (1995) report a mean of 241 msec across the United States compared to speed-of-light
  delays of less than 30 msec. Increased latency can be caused by efforts to improve throughput, such
  as batch compression at modems and pipelining in routers.
• Poor Locality: Backbone traffic studies (Thompson et al., 1997) show 250,000 different source–
  destination pairs (sometimes called flows) passing through a router in a very short duration. More
  recent estimates show around a million concurrent flows. Aggregating groups of headers with the
  same destination address or other means does not reduce the number of header classes significantly.
  Thus locality, or the likelihood of computation invested in a packet being reused on a future packet,
  is small.
• Small Packets: Thompson et al. (1997) also show that roughly half the packets received by a router
  are minimum-size 40-byte TCP acknowledgments. To avoid losing important packets in a stream
                                                                                             2.1 Protocols             21



  of minimum-size packets, most router- and network-adaptor vendors aim for “wire-speed forward-
  ing”—this is the ability to process minimum-size (40-byte) packets at the speed of the input link.1
• Critical Measures: It is worth distinguishing between global performance measures, such as end-
  to-end delay and bandwidth, and local performance measures, such as router lookup speeds. While
  global performance measures are crucial to overall network performance, this book focuses only on
  local performance measures, which are a key piece of the puzzle. In particular, this book focuses on
  forwarding performance and resource (e.g., memory, logic) measures.
• Tools: Most network management tools, such as HP’s OpenView, deal with global measures. The
  tools needed for local measures are tools to measure performance within computers, such as profiling
  software. Examples include Rational’s Quantify (http://www.rational.com) for application soft-
  ware, Intel’s VTune (www.intel.com/software/products/vtune/), and even hardware oscilloscopes.
  Network monitors such as tcpdump (www.tcpdump.org) are also useful.

                                    Case Study 1: SANs and iSCSI
       This case study shows that protocol features can greatly affect application performance. Many
   large data centers connect their disk drives and computers together using a storage area network
   (SAN). This allows computers to share disks. Currently, storage area networks are based on Fiber-
   Channel (Benner, 1995) components, which are more expensive than, say, Gigabit Ethernet. The
   proponents of iSCSI (Internet storage) (Satran et al., 2001) protocols seek to replace FiberChannel
   protocols with (hopefully cheaper) TCP/IP protocols and components.
       SCSI is the protocol used by computers to communicate with local disks. It can also be used
   to communicate with disks across a network. A single SCSI command could ask to read 10
   megabytes (MB) of data from a remote disk. Currently, such remote SCSI commands run over
   a FiberChannel transport protocol implemented in the network adaptors. Thus a 10-MB transfer is
   broken up into multiple FiberChannel packets, sent, delivered, and acknowledged (acked) without
   any per-packet processing by the requesting computer or responding disk.
       The obvious approach to reduce costs is to replace the proprietary FiberChannel transport
   layer with TCP and the FiberChannel network layer with IP. This would allow us to replace ex-
   pensive FiberChannel switches in SANs with commodity Ethernet switches. However, this has
   three implications. First, to compete with FiberChannel performance, TCP will probably have
   to be implemented in hardware. Second, TCP sends and delivers a byte stream (see Fig. A.1 in
   Appendix if needed). Thus multiple sent SCSI messages can be merged at the receiver. Message
   boundaries must be recovered by adding another iSCSI header containing the length of the next
   SCSI message.
       The third implication is trickier. Storage vendors (Satran et al., 2001) wish to process SCSI
   commands out of order. If two independent SCSI messages C1 and C2 are sent in order but the
   C2 data arrives before C1, TCP will buffer C2 until C1 arrives. But the storage enthusiast wishes
   to steer C2 directly to a preallocated SCSI buffer and process C2 out of order, a prospect that
   makes the TCP purist cringe. The length field method described earlier fails for this purpose




1 The preoccupation with wire-speed forwarding in networking is extremely different from the mentality in computer architec-
ture, which is content with optimizing typical (and not worst-case) performance as measured on benchmarks.
22       Chapter 2 Network implementation models



  because a missing TCP segment (containing the SCSI message length) makes it impossible to find
  later message boundaries. An alternate proposal suggests having the iSCSI layer insert headers at
  periodic intervals in the TCP byte stream, but the jury is still out.




2.2 Hardware
As links approach 40-gigabit/sec OC-768 speeds, a 40-byte packet must be forwarded in 8 nsec. At such
speeds, packet forwarding is typically directly implemented in hardware instead of on a programmable
processor. You cannot participate in the design process of such hardware-intensive designs without
understanding the tools and constraints of hardware designers. And yet, a few simple models can allow
you to understand and even play with hardware designs. Even if you have no familiarity with and
have a positive distaste for hardware, you are invited to take a quick tour of hardware design, full of
networking examples to keep you awake.
   Internet lookups are often implemented using combinational logic, Internet packets are stored in
router memories, and an Internet router is put together with components such as switches and lookup
chips. Thus our tour begins with logic implementation, continues with memory internals, and ends
with component-based design. For more details, we refer the reader to the classic VLSI text (Mead
and Conway, 1980), which still wears well despite its age, and the classic computer architecture text
(Hennessey and Patterson, 1996).


2.2.1 Combinatorial logic
Section A.2.1 in Appendix describes very simple models of basic hardware gates, such as NOT, NAND,
and NOR, that can be understood by even a software designer who is willing to read a few pages.
However, even knowing how basic gates are implemented is not required to have some insight into
hardware design.
    The first key to understanding logic design is the following observation. Given NOT, NAND, and
NOR gates, Boolean algebra shows that any Boolean function f (I1 , . . . , In ) of n inputs can be imple-
mented. Each bit of a multibit output can be considered a function of the input bits. Logic minimization
is often used to eliminate redundant gates and sometimes to increase speed. For example, if + denotes
OR and · denotes AND, then the function O = I1 · I2 + I1 · I2 can be simplified to O = I1 .

Example 1. Quality of Service and Priority Encoders: Suppose we have a network router that maintains
n output packet queues for a link, where queue i has higher priority than queue j if i < j . This problem
comes under the category of providing quality of service (QoS), which is covered in Chapter 14. The
transmit scheduler in the router must pick a packet from the first nonempty packet queue in priority
order. Assume the scheduler maintains an N -bit vector (bitmap) I such that I [ j ] = 1 if and only if
queue j is nonempty. Then the scheduler can find the highest-priority nonempty queue by finding the
smallest position in I in which a bit is set. Hardware designers know this function intimately as a
priority encoder. However, even a software designer should realize that this function is feasible for
hardware implementation for reasonable n. This function is examined more closely in Example 2.
                                                                                                   2.2 Hardware     23



2.2.2 Timing and power
To forward a 40-byte packet at OC-768 speeds, any networking function on the packet must complete
in 8 nsec. Thus the maximum signal transmission delay from inputs to outputs on any logic path must
not exceed 8 nsec.2 To ensure this constraint, a model of signal transmission delay in a transistor is
needed.
    Roughly speaking, each logic gate, such as a NAND or NOT gate, can be thought of as a set of
capacitors and resistors that must be charged (when input values change) in order to compute output
values. Worse, charging one input gate can cause the outputs of later gates to charge further inputs,
and so on. Thus for a combinatorial function, the delay to compute the function is the sum of the
charging and discharging delays over the worst-case path of transistors. Such path delays must fit within
a minimum packet arrival time. Besides the time to charge capacitors, another source of delay is wire
delay. More details can be found in Section A.2.2.
    It also takes energy to charge capacitors, where the energy per unit time (power) scales with the
square of the voltage, the capacitance, and the clock frequency at which inputs can change; P = CV 2 f .
While new processes shrink voltage levels and capacitance, higher-speed circuits must increase clock
frequency. Similarly, parallelism implies more capacitors being charged at a time. Thus many high-
speed chips dissipate a lot of heat, requiring nontrivial cooling techniques such as heat sinks. ISPs and
colocation facilities are large consumers of power. While our level of abstraction precludes understand-
ing power trade-offs, it is good to be aware that chips and routers are sometimes power limited. Some
practical limits today are 30 watts per square centimeter on a single die and 10,000 watts per square
foot in a data center.
Example 2. Priority Encoder Design: Consider the problem of estimating timing for the priority en-
coder of Example 1 for an OC-768 link using 40-byte packets. Thus the circuit has 8 nsec to produce
the output. Assume the input I and outputs O are N -bit vectors such that O[j ] = 1 if and only if
I [j ] = 1 and I [k] = 0 for all k < j . Notice that the output is represented in unary (often called 1-hot
representation) rather than binary. The specification leads directly to the combinational logic equation
O[j ] = I [1] . . . I [j − 1]I [j ] for j > 0.
     This design can be implemented directly using N AND gates, one for each output bit, where the N
gates take a number of inputs that range from 1 to N . Intuitively, since N input AND gates take O(N )
transistors, we have a design, Design 1, with O(N 2 ) transistors that appears to take O(1) time.3 Even
this level of design is helpful, though one can do better.
     A more area-economical design is based on the observation that every output bit O[j ] requires
the AND of the complement of the first j − 1 input bits. Thus we define the partial results P [j ] =
I [1] . . . I [j − 1] for j = 2 . . . N. Clearly, O[j ] = I [j ]P [j ]. But P [j ] can be constructed recursively us-
ing the equation P [j ] = P [j − 1]I [j − 1], which can be implemented using N two-input AND gates,
connected in series. This produces a design, Design 2, that takes O(N ) transistors but takes O(N ) time.
     Design 1 is fast and fat, and Design 2 is slow and lean. This is a familiar time–space trade-off
and suggests we can get something in between. The computation of P [j ] in Design 2 resembles an
unbalanced binary tree of height N . However, it is obvious that P [N ] can be computed using a fully


2 Alternatively, parts of the function can be parallelized/pipelined, but then each part must complete in 8 nsec.
3 A more precise argument, due to David Harris, using the method of Sutherland et al. (1999), shows the delay scales as
log(N log N ) because of the effort required to charge a tree of N transistors in each AND gate.
24       Chapter 2 Network implementation models



balanced binary of 2-input AND gates of height log N . A little thought then shows that the partial
results of the binary tree can be combined in simple ways to get P [j ] for all j < N using the same
binary tree (Wang and Huang, 2000).
    For example, if N = 8, to compute P [8] we compute X = I [0] . . . I [3] and Y = I [4] . . . I [7] and
compute the AND of X and Y at the root. Thus, it is easy to calculate P [5], for instance, using one
more AND gate by computing X · I [4]. Such a method is very commonly used by hardware designers
to replace apparently long O(N) computation chains with chains of length 2 log N . Since it was first
used to speed up carry chains in addition, it is known as carry look-ahead or simply look-ahead. While
look-ahead techniques appear complex, even software designers can master them because, at their core,
they use divide-and-conquer.


2.2.3 Raising the abstraction level of hardware design
Hand designing each transistor in a network chip design consisting of 1 million transistors would be
time consuming. The design process can be reduced to a few months using building blocks. A quick
description of building block technologies, such as PLAs, PALs, and standard cells, can be found in
Section A.2.5.
    The high-order bit, however, is that just as software designers reuse code, so also hardware designers
reuse a repertoire of commonly occurring functions. Besides common computational blocks, such as
adders, multipliers, comparators, and priority encoders, designs also use decoders, barrel shifters, mul-
tiplexers, and demultiplexers. It is helpful to be familiar with these “arrows” in the hardware designer’s
quiver.
    A decoder converts a log N -bit binary value to an N -bit unary encoding of the same value; while
binary representations are more compact, unary representations are more convenient for computation.
A barrel shifter shifts an input I by s positions to the left or right, with the bits shifted off from an end
coming around to the other end.
    A multiplexer (mux) connects one of several inputs to a common output, while its dual, the de-
multiplexer, routes one input to one of several possible outputs. More precisely, a multiplexer (mux)
connects one of n input bits Ij to the output O if a log n-bit select signal S encodes the value j in
binary. Its dual, the demultiplexer, connects input I to output Oj if the signal S encodes the value j in
binary.
    Thus the game becomes one of decomposing a complex logic function into instances of the standard
functions, even using recursion when needed. This is exactly akin to reduction and divide-and-conquer
and is easily picked up by software designers. For example, Fig. 2.3 shows the typical Lego puzzle faced
by hardware designers: Build a 4-input multiplexer from 2-input multiplexers. Start by choosing one of
I0 and I1 using a 2-input mux and then choosing one of I2 and I3 by another 2-input mux. Clearly, the
outputs of the 2-input muxes in the first stage must be combined using a third 2-input mux; the only
cleverness required is to realize that the select signal for the first two muxes is the least significant bit
S0 of the 2-bit select signal, while the third mux chooses between the upper and lower halves and so
uses S1 as the select bit.
    The following networking example shows that reduction is a powerful design tool for designing
critical networking functions.
Example 3. Crossbar Scheduling and Programmable Priority Encoders: Examples 1 and 2 motivated
and designed a fast priority encoder (PE). A commonly used router arbitration mechanism uses an
                                                                                       2.2 Hardware             25




FIGURE 2.3
Building a 4-input mux with select bits S0 and S1 from three 2-input muxes. The figure uses the standard trapezoidal
icon for a mux.


enhanced form of priority encoder called a programmable priority encoder (PPE). There is an N -bit
input I as before, together with an additional log N -bit input P . The PPE circuit must compute an
output O such that O[j ] = 1, where j is the first position beyond P (treated as a binary value) that has
a nonzero bit in I . If P = 0, this reduces to a simple priority encoder.
    PPEs arise naturally in switch arbitration (see Chapter 13 for details). For now, suppose a router
connects N communication links. Suppose several input links wish to transmit a packet at the same
time to output link L. To avoid contention at L, each of the inputs sends a request to L in the first time
slot; L chooses which input link to grant a request to in the second slot; the granted input sends a packet
in the third time slot.
    To make its grant decision, L can store the requests received at the end of Slot 1 in an N -bit request
vector R, where R[i] = 1 if input link i wishes to transmit to L. For fairness, L should remember the
last input link P it granted a request to. Then, L should confer the grant to the first input link beyond
P that has a request. This is exactly a PPE problem with R and P as inputs. Since a router must do
arbitration for each time slot and each output link, a fast and area-efficient PPE design is needed. Even
a software designer can understand and possibly repeat the process (Gupta and McKeown, 1999b) used
to design the PPE found in the Tiny Tera, a switch built at Stanford and later commercialized. The basic
idea is reduction: reducing the design of a PPE to the design of a PE (Example 2).
    The first idea is simple. A PPE is essentially a PE whose highest-priority value starts at position P
instead of at 0. A barrel shifter can be used to shift I first to the left by P bits. After this, a simple PE
can be used. Of course, the output-bit vector is now shifted; we recover the original order by shifting
the output of the PE to the right by P bits. A barrel shifter for N -bit inputs can be implemented using a
tree of 2-input multiplexers in around log N time. Thus two barrel shifters and a PE take around 3 log N
gate delays.
    A faster design used in Gupta and McKeown (1999b), which requires only 2 log N gate delays, is
as follows. Split the problem into two parts. If the input has some bit set at position P or greater, then
the result can be found by using a PE operating on the original input after setting to zero all input bits
26        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.4
The Tiny Tera PPE design uses copy 1 of a priority encoder to find the highest bit set, if any, of all bits greater than
P using a mask encoding of P . If such a bit is not found, the output of a second copy of a priority encoder is enabled
using the bottom AND gate. The results of the two copies are then combined using an N-input OR gate.


with positions less than P .4 On the other hand, if the input has no bit set at a position P or greater, then
the result can be found by using a PE on the original input with no masking at all. This results in the
design of Fig. 2.4, which, when tested on a Texas Instrument Cell Library, was nearly twice as fast and
took three times less area than the barrel shifter design for a 32-port router.
    The message here is that the logic design used for a time-critical component of a very influential
switch design can be achieved using simple reductions and simple models. Such models are not beyond
the reach of those of us who do not live and breathe digital design.


2.2.4 Memories
In endnodes and routers, packet forwarding is performed using combinational logic, but packets and
forwarding state are stored in memories. Since memory access times are significantly slower than logic
delays, memories form major bottlenecks in routers and endnodes.


4 This can be done by ANDing the input with P encoded as a mask; such a mask is commonly known in the hardware community
as a thermometer encoding of P .
                                                                                          2.2 Hardware               27



    Further, different subsystems require different memory characteristics. For example, router vendors
feel it is important to buffer 200 msec—an upper bound on a round-trip delay—worth of packets to
avoid dropping packets during periods of congestion. At, say, 40 Gbit/sec per link, such packet buffer-
ing requires an enormous amount of memory. On the other hand, router lookups require a smaller
amount of memory, which is accessed randomly. Thus it helps to have simple models for different
memory technologies. Next, we describe registers, SRAMs, DRAMs, and interleaved memory tech-
nology. Simple implementation models of these memory components can be found in Section A.2.4 in
Appendix.

Registers
A flip-flop is a way of connecting two or more transistors in a feedback loop so that (in the absence of
Writes and power failures) the bit stays indefinitely without “leaking” away. A register is an ordered
collection of flip-flops. For example, most modern processors have a collection of 32- or 64-bit on-chip
registers. A 32-bit register contains 32 flip-flops, each storing a bit. Access from logic to a register on
the same chip is extremely fast, around 0.5–1 nsec.

SRAM
A static random access memory (SRAM) contains N registers addressed by log N address bits A.
SRAM is so named because the underlying flip-flops refresh themselves and so are “static.” Besides
flip-flops, an SRAM also needs a decoder that decodes A into a unary value used to select the right
register. Accessing an SRAM on-chip is only slightly slower than accessing a register because of the
added decode delay. At the time of writing, it was possible to obtain on-chip SRAMs with 0.5-nsec
access times. Access times of 1–2 nsec for on-chip SRAM and 5–10 nsec for off-chip SRAM are
common.

Dynamic RAM
An SRAM bit cell requires at least five transistors. Thus SRAM is always less dense or more expensive
than memory technology based on dynamic RAM (DRAM). The key idea is to replace the feedback
loop (and extra transistors) used to store a bit in a flip-flop with an output capacitance that can store
the bit; thus the charge leaks, but it leaks slowly. Loss due to leakage is fixed by refreshing the DRAM
cell externally within a few milliseconds. Of course, the complexity comes in manufacturing a high
capacitance using a tiny amount of silicon.
    DRAM chips appear to quadruple in capacity every 3 years (Fromm et al., 1997) and are heading
towards 1 gigabit on a single chip. Addressing these bits, even if they are packed together as 4- or even
32-bit “registers,” is tricky. Recall that the address must be decoded from (say) 20 bits to (say) one of
220 values. The complexity of such decode logic suggests divide-and-conquer. Why not decode in two
stages?
    Fig. 2.5 shows that most memories are internally organized two-dimensionally into rows and
columns. The upper address bits are decoded to select the row, and then the lower address bits are
used to decode the column. More precisely, the user first supplies the row address bits and enables a
signal called RAS (row address strobe); later, the user supplies the column address bits,5 and enables

5 Many DRAM chips take advantage of the fact that row and column addresses are not required at the same time to multiplex
row and column addresses on the same set of pins, reducing the pin count of the chip.
28        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.5
Most large memories are organized two-dimensionally in terms of rows and columns. Selecting a word consists of
selecting first the row and then the column within the row.


a signal called CAS (column address strobe). After a specified time, the desired memory word can
be read
      √ out. Assuming equal-size rows and columns, this reduces decode gate complexity from O(N )
to O( (N )) at the expense of one extra decode delay. Besides the required delay between RAS and
CAS, there is also a precharge delay between successive RAS and CAS invocations to allow time for
capacitors to charge.
    The fastest off-chip DRAMs take around 40–60 nsec to access (latency), with longer times, such
as 100 nsec, between successive reads (throughput) because of precharge restrictions. Some of this
latency includes the time to drive the address using external lines onto the DRAM interface pins; recent
innovations allow on-chip DRAM with lower access times of around 30 nsec. It seems clear that DRAM
will always be denser but slower than SRAM.

Page-mode DRAMs
One reason to understand DRAM structure is to understand how function can follow form. A classic
example is a trick to speed up access times called page mode. Page mode is beneficial for access patterns
that exhibit spatial locality, in which adjacent memory words are successively accessed. But having
made a row access in Fig. 2.5, one can access words within the row without incurring additional RAS
and precharge delays. Video RAMs exploit the same structure by having a row read into an SRAM,
which can be read out serially to refresh a display at high speed. Besides page mode and video RAMS,
perhaps there are other ideas that exploit DRAM structure that could be useful in networking.

Interleaved DRAMs
While memory latency is critical for computation speed, memory throughput (often called bandwidth)
is also important for many network applications. Suppose a DRAM has a word size of 32 bits and a
cycle time of 100 nsec. Then the throughput using a single copy of the DRAM is limited to 32 bits
every 100 nsec. Clearly, throughput can be improved using access to multiple DRAMs. As in Fig. 2.6,
multiple DRAMs (called banks) can be strung together on a single bus. The user can start a Read to
                                                                               2.2 Hardware            29




FIGURE 2.6
The idea behind RAMBUS, SDRAM, and numerous variants is to create a single chip containing multiple DRAM
parallel memories to gain memory bandwidth while using only one set of address and data lines.


Bank 1 by placing the address on the address bus. Assume each DRAM bank takes 100 nsec to return
the selected data.
    Instead of idling during this 100-nsec delay, the user can place a second address for Bank 2, a third
for Bank 3, and so on. If the placing of each address takes 10 nsec, the user can “feed” 10 DRAM banks
before the answer to the first DRAM bank query arrives, followed 10 nsec later by the answer to the
second DRAM bank query, and so on. Thus the net memory bandwidth in this example is 10 times the
memory bandwidth of a single DRAM, as long as the user can arrange to have consecutive accesses
touch different banks.
    While using multiple memory banks is a very old idea, it is only in the last 5 years that memory
designers have integrated several banks into a single memory chip (Fig. 2.6), where the address and
data lines for all banks are multiplexed using a common high-speed network called a bus. In addition,
page-mode accesses are often allowed on each bank. Memory technologies based on this core idea
abound, with different values for the DRAM sizes, the protocol to read and write, and the number of
banks. Prominent examples include SDRAM with two banks and RDRAM with 16 banks.
Example 4. Pipelined Flow ID Lookups: A flow is characterized by source and destination IP addresses
and TCP ports. Some customers would like routers to keep track of the number of packets sent by each
network flow, for accounting purposes. This requires a data structure that stores a counter for each flow
ID and supports the two operations of Insert (FlowId) to insert a new flow ID, and Lookup (FlowId)
to find the location of a counter for a flow ID. Lookup requires an exact match on the flow ID—which
is around 96 bits—in the time to receive a packet. This can be done by any exact-matching algorithm,
such as hashing.
    However, if, as many router vendors wish to do, the worst-case lookup time must be small and
bounded, binary search (Cormen et al., 1990) is a better idea. Assume that flow ID lookups must be
done at wire speeds for worst-case 40-byte packets at 2.5 Gbits/sec or OC-48 speeds. Thus the chip has
128 nsec to look up a flow ID.
    To bound lookup delays, consider using a balanced binary tree, such as a B-tree. The logic for
tree traversal is fairly easy. For speed, ideally the flow IDs and counters should be stored in SRAM.
