                                                                  3.2 Algorithms versus algorithmics                          55



prefixes,1 creating a hole at the end of the length-2 prefixes, etc., until we create a hole at the end of the
length-i prefixes. Thus the worst-case time is 32 − i memory accesses, which is around 32 for small i.
    Are we done? No, we can do better by further exploiting degrees of freedom. First, in Fig. 3.5 we
assumed that the free space was at the top of the CAM. But the free space could be placed anywhere. In
particular, it can be placed after the length-16 prefixes. This reduces the worst-case number of memory
accesses by a factor of 2 (Shah and Gupta, 2001).
    A more sophisticated degree of freedom is as follows. So far, the specification of the CAM insertion
algorithm required that “a prefix of length i must occur before a prefix of length j if i > j .” Such
a specification is sufficient for correctness but is not necessary. For example, 010* can occur before
111001* because there is no address that can match both prefixes!
    Thus a less exacting specification is “if two prefixes P and Q can match the same address, then P
must come before Q in the CAM if P is longer than Q.” This is used in Shah and Gupta (2001) to
further reduce the worst-case number of memory accesses for insertion for some practical databases.
    While the last improvement is not worth its complexity, it points to another important principle. We
often divide a large problem into subproblems and hand over the subproblem for a solution based on a
specification. For example, the CAM hardware designer may have handed over the update problem to
a microcoder, specifying that longer prefixes be placed before shorter ones.
    But, as before, such a specification may not be the only way to solve the original problem. Thus
changes to the specification (principle P3) can yield a more efficient solution. Of course, this requires
curious and confident individuals who understand the big picture or who are brave enough to ask dan-
gerous questions.



3.2 Algorithms versus algorithmics
It may be possible to argue that the previous example is still essentially algorithmic and does not
require system thinking. One more quick example will help clarify the difference between algorithms
and algorithmics.

Security forensics problem
In many intrusion detection systems, a manager often finds that a flow (defined by some packet header,
for example, a source IP address) is likely to be misbehaving based on some probabilistic check. For
example, a source doing a port scan may be identified after it has sent 100,000 packets to different
machines in the attacked subnet.
    While there are methods to identify such sources, one problem is that the evidence (the 100,000
packets sent by the source) has typically disappeared (i.e., been forwarded from the router) by the time
the guilty source is identified. The problem is that the probabilistic check requires accumulating some
state (in, say, a suspicion table) for every packet received over some period of time before a source can
be deemed suspicious. Thus if a source is judged to be suspicious after 10 seconds, how can one go
back in time and retrieve the packets sent by the source during those 10 seconds?


1 For simplicity, this description has assumed that the CAM contains prefixes of all lengths; it is easy to modify the algorithm to
avoid this assumption.
56        Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles




FIGURE 3.6
Keeping a queue of the last 100,000 packets that contains forensic information about what suspicious flows have
been sent in the past.


    To accomplish this, in Fig. 3.6 we keep a queue of the last 100,000 packets that were sent by the
router. When a packet is forwarded, we also add a copy of the packet (or just keep a pointer to the
packet) to the head of the queue. To keep the queue bounded, when the queue is full, we delete from
the tail as well.
    The main difficulty with this scheme is that when a guilty flow is detected, there may be lots of
the flow’s packets in the queue (Fig. 3.6). All of these packets must be placed in the forensic log for
transmission to a manager. The naive method of searching through a large DRAM buffer is very slow.
    The textbook algorithms approach would be to add some index structure to search quickly for flow
IDs. For example, one might maintain a hash table of flow IDs that maps every flow to a list of pointers
to all packets with that flow ID in the queue. When a new packet is placed in the queue, the flow ID is
looked up in the hash table and the address of the new packet in the queue is placed at the end of the
flow’s list. Of course, when packets leave the queue, their entries must be removed from the list, and
the list can be long. Fortunately, the entry to be deleted is guaranteed to be at the head of the queue for
that flow ID.
    Despite this, the textbook scheme has some difficulties. It adds more space to maintain these extra
queues per flow ID, and space can be at a premium for a high-speed implementation. It also adds some
extra complexity to packet processing to maintain the hash table and requires reading out all of a flow’s
packets to the forensic log before the packet is overwritten by a packet that arrives 100,000 packets
later. Instead, the following “systems” solution may be more elegant.

Solution
Do not attempt to immediately identify all of a flow F ’s packets when F is identified, but lazily identify
them as they reach the end of the packet queue. This is shown in Fig. 3.7. When we add a packet to the
head of the queue, we must remove a packet from the end of the queue (at least when the queue is full).
             3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description                                 57




FIGURE 3.7
Keeping a queue of the last 100,000 packets that contains forensic information about what suspicious flows have
been sent in the past.



    If that packet (say, Q, see Fig. 3.6) belongs to flow F that is in the Suspicion Table and flow F has
reached some threshold of suspicion, we then add packet Q to the forensic log. The log can be sent
to a manager. The overhead of this scheme is significant but manageable; we have to do two packet-
processing steps, one for the packet being forwarded and one for the packet being removed from the
queue. But these two packet-processing steps are also required in the textbook scheme; on the other
hand, the elegant scheme requires no hashing and uses much less storage (no pointers between the
100,000 packets).



3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description
The two earlier examples and the warm-up exercise in Chapter 1 motivate the following 15 principles,
which are used in the rest of the book. They are summarized inside the front cover. To add more
structure, they are categorized as follows:
• Systems Principles: Principles 1–5 take advantage of the fact that a system is constructed from
  subsystems. By taking a systemwide rather than a black-box approach, one can often improve per-
  formance.
• Improving Efficiency While Retaining Modularity: Principles 6–10 suggest methods for improv-
  ing performance while allowing complex systems to be built modularly.
• Speeding It Up: Principles 11–15 suggest techniques for speeding up a key routine considered by
  itself.
58       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



    Amazingly, many of these principles have been used for years by Chef Charlie at his Greasy Spoon
restaurant. This chapter sometimes uses illustrations drawn from Chef Charlie’s experience, in addition
to computer systems examples. One networking example is also described for each principle, though
details are deferred to later chapters.


3.3.1 Systems principles
The first five principles exploit the fact that we are building systems.

P1: Avoid obvious waste in common situations
In a system, there may be wasted resources in special sequences of operations. If these patterns occur
commonly, it may be worth eliminating the waste. This reflects an attitude of thriftiness toward system
costs.
    For example, Chef Charlie has to make a trip to the pantry to get the ice cream maker to make ice
cream and to the pantry for a pie plate when he makes pies. But when he makes pie à la mode, he has
learned to eliminate the obvious waste of two separate trips to the pantry.
    Similarly, optimizing compilers look for obvious waste in terms of repeated subexpressions. For
example, if a statement calculates i = 5.1 ∗ n + 2 and a later statement calculates j := (5.1 ∗ n + 2) ∗ 4,
the calculation of the common subexpression 5.1 ∗ n + 2 is wasteful and can be avoided by computing
the subexpression once, assigning it to a temporary variable t, and then calculating i := t and j := t ∗ 4.
A classic networking example, described in Chapter 5, is avoiding making multiple copies of a packet
between the operating system and user buffers.
    Notice that each operation (e.g., walk to pantry, line of code, single packet copy) considered by
itself has no obvious waste. It is the sequence of operations (two trips to the pantry, two statements
that recompute a subexpression, two copies) that have obvious waste. Clearly, the larger the exposed
context, the greater the scope for optimization. While the identification of certain operation patterns as
being worth optimizing is often a matter of designer intuition, optimizations can be tested in practice
using benchmarks.

P2: Shift computation in time
Systems have an aspect in space and time. The space aspect is represented by the subsystems, possibly
geographically distributed, into which the system is decomposed. The time aspect is represented by
the fact that a system is instantiated at various time scales, from fabrication time to compile time to
parameter-setting times to run time. Many efficiencies can be gained by shifting computation in time.
Here are three generic methods that fall under time-shifting.
• P2a: Precompute. This refers to computing quantities before they are actually used, to save time at
  the point of use. For example, Chef Charlie prepares crushed garlic in advance to save time during
  the dinner rush. A common systems example is table-lookup methods, where the computation of an
  expensive function f in run time is replaced by the lookup of a table that contains the value of f
  for every element in the domain of f . A networking example is the precomputation of IP and TCP
  headers for packets in a connection; because only a few header fields change for each packet, this
  reduces the work to write packet headers (Chapter 9).
• P2b: Evaluate Lazily. This refers to postponing expensive operations at critical times, hoping that
  either the operation will not be needed later or a less busy time will be found to perform the opera-
             3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description                               59




FIGURE 3.8
Easing the implementation of Subsystem 1 by weakening its specification from S to, say, W , at the cost of making
Subsystem 2 do more work.


  tion. For example, Chef Charlie postpones dishwashing to the end of the day. While precomputation
  is computing before the need, lazy evaluation is computing only when needed.
  A famous example of lazy evaluation in systems is copy-on-write in the Mach operating system. Sup-
  pose we have to copy a virtual address space A to another space, B, for process migration. A general
  solution is to copy all pages in A to B to allow for pages in B to be written independently. Instead,
  copy-on-write makes page table entries in B’s virtual address space point to the corresponding page
  in A. When a process using B writes to a location, then a separate copy of the corresponding page in
  A is made for B, and the write is performed. Since we expect the number of pages that are written
  in B to be small compared to the total number of pages, this avoids unnecessary copying.
  A simple networking example occurs when a network packet arrives at an endnode X in a different
  byte order than X’s native byte order. Rather than swap all bytes immediately, it can be more efficient
  to wait to swap the bytes that are actually read.
• P2c: Share Expenses. This refers to taking advantage of expensive operations done by other parts
  of the system. An important example of expense sharing is batching, where several expensive op-
  erations can be done together more cheaply than doing each separately. For example, Charlie bakes
  several pies in one batch. Computer systems have used batch processing for years, especially in the
  early days of mainframes, before time sharing. Batching trades latency for throughput. A simple
  networking example of expense sharing is timing wheels (Chapter 7), where the timer data structure
  shares expensive per-clock-tick processing with the routine that updates the time-of-day clock.

P3: Relax system requirements
When a system is first designed top-down, functions are partitioned among subsystems. After fixing
subsystem requirements and interfaces, individual subsystems are designed. When implementation dif-
ficulties arise, the basic system structure may have to be redone, as shown in Fig. 3.8.
    As shown in Chapter 1, implementation difficulties (e.g., implementing a divide) can sometimes be
solved by relaxing the specification requirements for, say, Subsystem 1. This is shown in the figure by
weakening the specification of Subsystem 1 from, say, S to W , but at the cost of making Subsystem 2
obey a stronger property, Q, compared to the previous property, P .
    Three techniques that arise from this principle are distinguished by how they relax the original
subsystem specification.
60        Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



• P3a: Trade Certainty for Time. Systems designers can fool themselves into believing that their
  systems offer deterministic guarantees, when in fact we all depend on probabilities. For example,
  quantum mechanics tells us there is some probability that the atoms in your body will rearrange
  themselves to form a hockey puck, but this is clearly improbable.2 This opens the door to consider
  randomized strategies when deterministic algorithms are too slow.
  In systems, randomization is used by millions of Ethernets worldwide to sort out packet-sending
  instants after collisions occur. A simple networking example of randomization is Cisco’s NetFlow
  traffic measurement software: If a router does not have enough processing power to count all arriving
  packets, it can count random samples and still be able to statistically identify large flows. A second
  networking example is stochastic fair queuing (Chapter 14), where, rather than keep track exactly
  of the networking conversations going through a router, conversations are tracked probabilistically
  using hashing.
• P3b: Trade Accuracy for Time. Similarly, numerical analysis cures us of the illusion that comput-
  ers are perfectly accurate. Thus it can pay to relax accuracy requirements for speed. In systems,
  many image compression techniques, such as MPEG, rely on lossy compression using interpolation.
  Chapter 1 used approximate thresholds to replace divides by shifts. In networking, some packet-
  scheduling algorithms at routers (Chapter 14) require sorting packets by their departure deadlines;
  some proposals to reduce sorting overhead at high speeds suggest approximate sorting, which can
  slightly reduce quality-of-service bounds but reduce processing.
• P3c: Shift Computation in Space. Notice that all the examples given for this principle relaxed re-
  quirements: Sampling may miss some packets, and the transferred image may not be identical to the
  original image. However, other parts of the system (e.g., Subsystem 2 in Fig. 3.8) have to adapt to
  these looser requirements. Thus we prefer to call the general idea of moving computation from one
  subsystem to another (“robbing Peter to pay Paul”) shifting computation in space. In networking, for
  example, the need for routers to fragment packets has recently been avoided by having end systems
  calculate a packet size that will pass all routers.

P4: Leverage off system components
A black-box view of system design is to decompose the system into subsystems and then to design
each subsystem in isolation. While this top-down approach has a pleasing modularity, in practice
performance-critical components are often constructed partially bottom-up. For example, algorithms
are designed to fit the features offered by the hardware. Here are some techniques that fall under this
principle.
• P4a: Exploit Locality. Chapter 2 showed that memory hardware offers efficiencies if related data
  is laid out contiguously, e.g., same sector for disks, or same DRAM page for DRAMs. Disk-search
  algorithms exploit this fact by using search trees of high radix, such as B-trees. IP-lookup algorithms
  (Chapter 11) use the same trick to reduce lookup times by placing several keys in a wide word, as
  did the example in Chapter 1.
• P4b: Trade Memory for Speed. The obvious technique is to use more memory, such as lookup tables,
  to save processing time. A less obvious technique is to compress a data structure to make it more
  likely to fit into cache, because cache accesses are cheaper than memory accesses; in this case,


2 Quote due to Tony Lauck.
              3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description                                            61



  both memory and speed may be improved. The Lulea IP-lookup algorithm described in Chapter 11
  uses this idea by using sparse arrays that can still be looked up efficiently using space-efficient
  bitmaps.
• P4c: Exploit Hardware Features. Compilers use strength reduction to optimize away multipli-
  cations in loops; for example, in a loop where addresses are 4 bytes and the index i increases
  by 1 each time, instead of computing 4 ∗ i, the compiler calculates the new array index as be-
  ing 4 higher than its previous value. This exploits the fact that multiplies are more expensive
  than additions on many modern processors. Similarly, it pays to manipulate data in multiples of
  the machine word size, as we will see in the fast IP-checksum algorithms described in Chap-
  ter 9.
    If this principle is carried too far, the modularity of the system will be in jeopardy. Two techniques
alleviate this problem. First, if we exploit other system features only to improve performance, then
changes to those system features can only affect performance and not correctness. Second, we use this
technique only for system components that profiling has shown to be a bottleneck.

P5: Add hardware to improve performance
When all else fails, goes the aphorism, use brute force. Adding new hardware,3 such as buying a faster
processor, can be simpler and more cost effective than using clever techniques. Besides the brute-force
approach of using faster infrastructure (e.g., faster processors, memory, buses, links), there are cleverer
hardware–software trade-offs. Since hardware is less flexible and has higher design costs, it pays to add
the minimum amount of hardware needed.
    Thus baking at the Greasy Spoon was sped up using microwave ovens. In computer systems, dra-
matic improvements each year in processor speeds and memory densities suggest doing key algorithms
in software and upgrading to faster processors for speed increases. But computer systems abound with
cleverer hardware–software trade-offs.
    For example, in a multiprocessor system, if a processor wishes to write data, it must inform any
“owners” of cached versions of the data. This interaction can be avoided if each processor has a piece
of hardware that watches the bus for write transactions by other processors and automatically inval-
idates the cached location when necessary. This simple hardware snoopy cache controller allows the
remainder of the cache-consistency algorithm to be efficiently performed in software.
    Decomposing functions between hardware and software is an art in itself. Hardware offers several
benefits. First, there is no time required to fetch instructions: Instructions are effectively hardcoded.
Second, common computational sequences (which would require several instructions in software) can
be done in a single hardware clock cycle. For example, finding the first bit set in, say, a 32-bit word
may take several instructions on a RISC machine but can be computed by a simple priority encoder, as
shown in the previous chapter.
    Third, hardware allows you to explicitly take advantage of parallelism inherent in the problem.
Finally, hardware manufactured in volume may be cheaper than a general-purpose processor. For ex-
ample, a Pentium may cost $100, while an ASIC in volume with similar speeds may cost $10.


3 By contrast, Principle P4 talks about exploiting existing system features, such as the existing hardware. Of course, the distinc-
tion between principles tends to blur and must be taken with a grain of salt.
62       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



    On the other hand, a software design is easily transported to the next generation of faster chips.
Hardware, despite the use of programmable chips, is still less flexible. Despite this, with the advent of
design tools such as VHDL synthesis packages, hardware design times have decreased considerably.
Thus in the last few years chips performing fairly complex functions, such as image compression and
IP lookups, have been designed.
    Besides specific performance improvements, new technology can result in a complete paradigm
shift. A visionary designer may completely redesign a system in anticipation of such trends. For exam-
ple, the invention of the transistor and fast digital memories certainly enabled the use of digitized voice
in the telephone network.
    Increases in chip density have led computer architects to ponder what computational features to add
to memories to alleviate the processor-memory bottleneck. In networks, the availability of high-speed
links in the 1980s led to the use of large addresses and large headers. Ironically, the emergence of
laptops in the 1990s led to the use of low-bandwidth wireless links and to a renewed concern for header
compression. Technology trends can seesaw!
    The following specific hardware techniques are often used in networking ASICs and are worth
mentioning. They were first described in Chapter 2 and are repeated here for convenience.
• P5a: Use Memory Interleaving and Pipelining. Similar techniques are used in IP lookup, in classi-
  fication, and in scheduling algorithms that implement QoS. The multiple banks can be implemented
  using several external memories, a single external memory such as a RAMBUS, or on-chip SRAM
  within a chip that also contains processing logic.
• P5b: Use Wide Word Parallelism. A common theme in many networking designs, such as the
  Lucent bit vector scheme (Chapter 12), is to use wide memory words that can be processed in
  parallel. This can be implemented using DRAM and exploiting page mode or by using SRAM and
  making each memory word wider.
• P5c: Combine DRAM and SRAM. We have explained in Chapter 2 and will explain in Chapter 16
  two clever applications of this principle.


3.3.2 Principles for modularity with efficiency
An engineer who had read Dave Clark’s classic papers (e.g., Clark [1985]) on the inefficiencies of
layered implementations once complained to a researcher about modularity. The researcher (Radia
Perlman) replied, “But that’s how we got to the stage where we could complain about something.” Her
point, of course, was that complex systems like network protocols could only have been engineered
using layering and modularity. The following principles, culled from work by Clark and others, show
how to regain efficiencies while retaining modularity.

P6: Create efficient specialized routines by replacing inefficient general-purpose routines
As in mathematics, the use of abstraction in computer system design can make systems compact, or-
thogonal, and modular. However, at times the one-size-fits-all aspect of a general-purpose routine leads
to inefficiencies. In important cases, it can pay to design an optimized and specialized routine.
    A systems example can be found in database caches. Most general-purpose caching strategies would
replace the least recently used record to disk. However, consider a query-processing routine processing
a sequence of database tuples in a loop. In such a case, it is the most recently used record that will be
used furthest in the future, so it is the ideal candidate for replacement. Thus many database applications
             3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description                                       63



replace the operating system caching routines with more specialized routines. It is best to do such spe-
cialization only for key routines, to avoid code bloat. A networking example is the fast UDP processing
routines that we describe in Chapter 9.

P7: Avoid unnecessary generality
The tendency to design abstract and general subsystems can also lead to unnecessary or rarely used
features. Thus, rather than building several specialized routines (e.g., P6) to replace the general-purpose
routine, we might remove features to gain performance.4
    Of course, as in the case of P3, removing features requires users of the routine to live with re-
strictions. For example, in RISC processors, the elimination of complex instructions such as multiplies
required multiplication to be emulated by firmware. A networking example is provided by Fbufs (Chap-
ter 5), which provides a specialized virtual memory service that allows efficient copying between virtual
address spaces.

P8: Don’t be tied to reference implementations
Specifications are written for clarity, not to suggest efficient implementations. Because abstract speci-
fication languages are unpopular, many specifications use imperative languages such as C. Rather than
precisely describe what function is to be computed, one gets code that prescribes how to compute the
function. This has two side effects.
    First, there is a strong tendency to overspecify. Second, many implementors copy the reference
implementation in the specification, which is a problem when the reference implementation was chosen
for conceptual clarity and not efficiency. As Clark (1985) points out, implementors are free to change
the reference implementation as long as the two implementations have the same external effects. In
fact, there may be other structured implementations that are efficient as well as modular.
    For example, Charlie knows that when a recipe tells him to cut beans and then to cut carrots, he can
interchange the two steps. In the systems world, Clark originally suggested the use of upcalls (Clark,
1985) for operating systems. In an upcall, a lower layer can call an upper layer for data or advice, seem-
ingly violating the rules of hierarchical decomposition introduced in the design of operating systems.
Upcalls are commonly used today in network protocol implementations.

P9: Pass hints in module interfaces
A hint is information passed from a client to a service that, if correct, can avoid expensive computation
by the service. The two key phrases are passed and if correct. By passing the hint in its request, a
service can avoid the need for the associative lookup needed to access a cache. For example, a hint can
be used to supply a direct index into the processing state at the receiver. Also, unlike caches, the hint is
not guaranteed to be correct and hence must be checked against other certifiably correct information.
Hints improve performance if the hint is correct most of the time.
    This definition of a hint suggests a variant in which information is passed that is guaranteed to be
correct and hence requires no checking. For want of an established term, we will call such information
a tip. Tips are harder to use because of the need to ensure the correctness of the tip.


4 Butler Lampson, a computer scientist and Turing Award winner, provides two quotes: When in doubt, get rid of it (anonymous)
and Exterminate Features (Thacker).
64       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



    As a systems example, the Alto File system (Lampson, 1989) has every file block on disk carry a
pointer to the next file block. This pointer is treated as only a hint and is checked against the file name
and block number stored in the block itself. If the hint is incorrect, the information can be reconstructed
from disk. Incorrect hints must not jeopardize system correctness but result only in performance degra-
dation.

P10: Pass hints in protocol headers
For distributed systems, the logical extension to Principle P9 is to pass information such as hints in
message headers. Since this book deals with distributed systems, we will make this a separate principle.
For example, computer architects have applied this principle to circumvent inefficiencies in message-
passing parallel systems such as the Connection Machine.
    One of the ideas in active messages (Chapter 5) is to have a message carry the address of the
interrupt handler for fast dispatching. Another example is tag switching (Chapter 11), where packets
carry additional indices besides the destination address to help the destination address to be looked up
quickly. Tags are used as hints because tag consistency is not guaranteed; packets can be routed to the
wrong destination, where they must be checked.


3.3.3 Principles for speeding up routines
While the previous principles exploited system structure, we now consider principles for speeding up
system routines considered in isolation.

P11: Optimize the expected case
While systems can exhibit a range of behaviors, the behaviors often fall into a smaller set called the
“expected case” (Hennessey and Patterson, 1996). For example, well-designed systems should mostly
operate in a fault- and exception-free regime. A second example is a program that exhibits spatial
locality by mostly accessing a small set of memory locations. Thus it pays to make common behaviors
efficient, even at the cost of making uncommon behaviors more expensive.
    Heuristics such as optimizing the expected case are often unsatisfying for theoreticians, who (natu-
rally) prefer mechanisms whose benefit can be precisely quantified in an average or worst-case sense.
In defense of this heuristic, note that every computer in existence optimizes the expected case (see
Chapter 2) at least a million times a second.
    For example, with the use of paging, the worst-case number of memory references to resolve a
PC instruction that accesses memory can be as bad as four (read instruction from memory, read first-
level page table, read second-level page table, fetch operand from memory). However, the number of
memory accesses can be reduced to 0 using caches. In general, caches allow designers to use modular
structures and indirection, with gains in flexibility, and yet regain performance in the expected case.
Thus it is worth highlighting caching.

P11a: Use caches
Besides caching, there are subtler uses of the expected-case principle. For example, when you wish to
change buffers in the EMACS editor, the editor offers you a default buffer name, which is the last buffer
you examined. This saves typing time in the expected case when you keep moving between two buffers.
The use of header prediction (Chapter 9) in networks is another example of optimizing the expected
           3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description                       65



case: The cost of processing a packet can be greatly reduced by assuming that the next packet received
is closely related to the last packet processed (for example, by being the next packet in sequence) and
requires no exception processing.
    Note that determining the common case is best done by measurements and by schemes that auto-
matically learn the common case. However, it is often based on the designer’s intuition. Note that the
expected case may be incorrect in special situations or may change with time.

P12: Add or exploit state to gain speed
If an operation is expensive, consider maintaining additional but redundant state to speed up the op-
eration. For example, Charlie keeps track of the tables that are busy so that he can optimize waiter
assignments. This is not absolutely necessary, for he can always compute this information when needed
by walking around the restaurant.
    In database systems, a classic example is the use of secondary indices. Bank records may be stored
and searched using a primary key, say, the customer’s Social Security number. However, if there are
several queries that reference the customer name (e.g., “Find the balance of all Cleopatra’s accounts in
the Thebes branch”), it may pay to maintain an additional index (e.g., a hash table or B-tree) on the
customer name. Note that maintaining additional state implies the need to potentially modify this state
whenever changes occur.
    However, sometimes this principle can be used without adding state by exploiting the existing state.
We call this out as Principle P12a.

P12a: Compute incrementally
When a new customer comes in or leaves, Charlie increments the board on which he notes waiter
assignments. As a second example, strength reduction in compilers (see example in P4c) incrementally
computes the new loop index from the old using additions instead of computing the absolute index using
multiplication. An example of incremental computation in networking is the incremental computation
of IP checksums (Chapter 9) when only a few fields in the packet change.

P13: Optimize degrees of freedom
It helps to be aware of the variables that are under one’s control and the evaluation criteria used to
determine good performance. Then the game becomes one of optimizing these variables to maximize
performance. For example, Charlie first used to assign waiters to tables as they became free, but he
realized he could improve waiter efficiency by assigning each waiter to a set of contiguous tables.
    Similarly, compilers use coloring algorithms to do register assignment while minimizing register
spills. A networking example of optimizing degrees of freedom is multibit trie IP lookup algorithms
(Chapter 11). In this example, a degree of freedom that can be overlooked is that the number of bits
used to index into a trie node can vary, depending on the path through the trie, as opposed to being fixed
at each level. The number of bits used can also be optimized via dynamic programming (Chapter 11)
to demand the smallest amount of memory for a given speed requirement.

P14: Use special techniques for finite universes such as integers
When dealing with small universes, such as moderately sized integers, techniques like bucket sorting,
array lookup, and bitmaps are often more efficient than general-purpose sorting and searching algo-
rithms.
66         Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



    To translate a virtual address into a physical address, a processor first tries a cache called the TLB.
If this fails, the processor must look up the page table. A prefix of the address bits is used to index into
the page table directly. The use of table lookup avoids the use of hash tables or binary search, but it
requires large page table sizes. A networking example of this technique is timing wheels (Chapter 7),
where an efficient algorithm for a fixed timer range is constructed using a circular array.

P15: Use algorithmic techniques to create efficient data structures
Even where there are major bottlenecks, such as virtual address translation, systems designers finesse
the need for clever algorithms by passing hints, using caches, and performing table lookup. Thus a
major system designer is reported to have told an eager theoretician: “I don’t use algorithms, son.”
    This book does not take this somewhat antiintellectual position. Instead, it contends that, in context,
efficient algorithms can greatly improve system performance. In fact, a fair portion of the book will be
spent describing such examples. However, there is a solid kernel of truth to the “I don’t use algorithms”
putdown. In many cases, Principles P1 through P14 need to be applied before any algorithmic issues
become bottlenecks.
    Algorithmic approaches include the use of standard data structures as well as generic algorithmic
techniques, such as divide-and-conquer and randomization. The algorithm designer must, however, be
prepared to see his clever algorithm become obsolete because of changes in system structure and tech-
nology. As described in the introduction, the real breakthroughs may arise from applying algorithmic
thinking as opposed to merely reusing existing algorithms.
    Examples of the successful use of algorithms in computer systems are the Lempel–Ziv compression
algorithm employed in the UNIX utility gzip, the Rabin–Miller primality test algorithm found in public
key systems, and the common use of B-trees (due to Bayer–McCreight) in databases (Cormen et al.,
1990). Networking examples studied in this text include the Lulea IP-lookup algorithm (Chapter 11)
and the RFC scheme for packet classification (Chapter 12).



3.4 Design versus implementation principles
Now that we have listed the principles used in this book, three clarifications are needed. First, con-
scious use of general principles does not eliminate creativity and effort but instead channels them more
efficiently. Second, the list of principles is necessarily incomplete and can probably be categorized in a
different way; however, it is a good place to start.
    Third, it is important to clarify the difference between system design and implementation principles.
Systems designers have articulated principles for system design. Design principles include, for exam-
ple, the use of hierarchies and aggregation for scaling (e.g., IP prefixes), adding a level of indirection for
increased flexibility (e.g., mapping from domain names to IP addresses allows DNS servers to balance
the load between instances of a server), and virtualization of resources for increased user productivity
(e.g., virtual memory).5
    A nice compilation of design principles can be found in Lampson’s article (Lampson, 1989) and
Keshav’s book (Keshav, 1997). Besides design principles, both Lampson and Keshav include a few


5 The previous chapter briefly explains these terms (IP prefixes, DNS, and virtual memory).
                                                                                          3.5 Caveats            67




FIGURE 3.9
Retrieval of a Web page with images typically requires one request to get the page that specifies the needed images
and more requests to retrieve each specified image. Why not have the Web server download the images directly?

implementation principles (e.g., “use hints” and “optimize the expected case”). This book, by contrast,
assumes that much of the network design is already given, and so we focus on principles for efficient
protocol implementation. This book also adds several principles for efficient implementation not found
in Keshav (1991) or Lampson (1989).
    On the other hand, Bentley’s book on “efficient program design” (Bentley, 1982) is more about
optimizing small code segments than the large systems that are our focus; thus many of Bentley’s
principles (e.g., fuse loops, unroll loops, reorder tests) are meant to speed up critical loops rather than
speed up systems as a whole.



3.5 Caveats
                                  Performance problems cannot be solved only through the use of Zen meditation.
                                                —Paraphrased from Jeff Mogul, a computer scientist at HP Labs

The best of principles must be balanced with wisdom to understand the important metrics, with profiling
to determine bottlenecks, and with experimental measurements to confirm that the changes are really
improvements. We start with two case studies to illustrate the need for caution.

                            Case study 1: Reducing page download times
      Fig. 3.9 shows that in order for a Web client to retrieve a Web page containing images, it must
  typically send a GET request for the page. If the page specifies inline images, then the client must
  send separate requests to retrieve the images before it can display the page. A natural application
  of principle P1 is to ask why separate requests are needed. Why can’t the Web server automatically
  download the images when the page is requested instead of waiting for a separate request? This
  should reduce page download latency by at least half a round trip delay.
68     Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



    To test our hypothesis, we modified the server software to do so and measured the resulting
 performance. To our surprise, we found only minimal latency improvement.
    Using a network analyzer based on tcpdump, we found two reasons why this seeming im-
 provement was a bad idea.
 • Interaction with TCP: Web transfer is orchestrated by TCP as described in Chapter 2. To
   avoid network congestion, TCP increases its rate slowly, starting with one packet per round-
   trip, then to two packets per round trip delay, increasing its rate when it gets acks. Since TCP
   had to wait for acks anyway to increase its rate, waiting for additional requests for images did
   not add latency.
 • Interaction with Client Caching: Many clients already cache common images, such as .gif
   files. It is a waste of bandwidth to have the Web server unilaterally download images that
   the client already has in its cache. Note that having the client request the images avoids this
   problem because the client will only request images it does not already have.
 A useful lesson from this case study is the difficulty of improving part of a system (e.g., image
 downloading) because of interactions with other parts of the system (e.g., TCP congestion control).


                  Case study 2: Speeding up signature-based intrusion detection
      As a second example, many network sites field an intrusion detection system, such as Snort
 (2001), that looks for suspicious strings in packet payloads that are characteristics of hacker at-
 tacks. An example is the string “perl.exe,” which may signify an attempt to execute perl and then
 to execute arbitrary commands on a Web server. For every potentially matching rule that contains
 a string, Snort searches for each such string separately using the Boyer–Moore algorithm (Cormen
 et al., 1990). The worst case happens to be a Web packet that matches 310 rules. Simple profiling
 using gprof reveals (Fisk and Varghese, 2001) that 30% of the overhead in Snort arises from string
 searching.
      An obvious application of P1 seemed to be the following: Instead of separate searches for each
 string, use an integrated search algorithm that searches for all possible strings in a single pass over
 the packet. We modified Boyer–Moore to a set Boyer–Moore algorithm that could search for all
 specified strings in one pass. Implemented in a library, the new algorithm performed better than
 the Snort algorithm by a factor of 50 for the full Snort database. Unfortunately, when we integrated
 it into Snort, we found almost no improvement on packet traces (Fisk and Varghese, 2001). We
 found two reasons for this.
 • Multiple string matching is not a bottleneck for the trace: For the given trace, very few
   packets matched multiple rules, each of which contained separate strings. When we used a trace
   containing only Web traffic (i.e., traffic with destination port 80), a substantial improvement
   was found.
 • Cache Effects: Integrated string searching requires a data structure, such as a trie, whose size
   grows with the number of strings being searched. The simplest way to do integrated set search-
   ing is to place the strings contained in all rules in a single trie. However, when the number
                                                                                   3.5 Caveats          69



      of strings went over 100, the trie did not fit in cache, and performance suffered. Thus the
      system had to be reimplemented to use collections of smaller sets that took into account the
      hardware (P4).
  A useful lesson from this case study is that purported improvements may not really target the
  bottleneck (which in the trace appears to be single-string matching) and can also interact with
  other parts of the system (the data cache).



3.5.1 Eight cautionary questions
In the spirit of the two case studies, here are eight cautionary questions that warn against the injudicious
use of the principles.

Q1: Is it worth improving performance?
If one were to sell the system as a product, is performance a major selling strength? People interested
in performance improvement would like to think so, but other aspects of a system, such as ease of use,
functionality, and robustness, may be more important. For example, a user of a network management
product cares more about features than performance. Thus, given limited resources and implementation
complexity, we may choose to defer optimizations until needed. Even if performance is important,
which performance metric (e.g., latency throughput, memory) is important?
    Other things being equal, simplicity is best. Simple systems are easier to understand, debug, and
maintain. On the other hand, the definition of simplicity changes with technology and time. Some
amount of complexity is worthwhile for large performance gains. For example, years ago image com-
pression algorithms such as MPEG were considered too complex to implement in software or hardware.
However, with increasing chip densities, many MPEG chips have come to market.

Q2: Is this really a bottleneck?
The 80–20 rule suggests that a large percentage of the performance improvements comes from op-
timizing a small fraction of the system. A simple way to start is to identify key bottlenecks for the
performance metrics we wish to optimize. One way to do so is to use profiling tools, as we did in Case
Study 2.

Q3: What impact does the change have on the rest of the system?
A simple change may speed up a portion of the system but may have complex and unforeseen effects
on the rest of the system. This is illustrated in Case Study 1. A change that improves performance but
has too many interactions should be reconsidered.

Q4: Does the initial analysis indicate significant improvement?
Before doing a complete implementation, a quick analysis can indicate how much gain is possible.
Standard complexity analysis is useful. However, when nanoseconds are at stake, constant factors are
important. For software and hardware, because memory accesses are a bottleneck, a reasonable first-
pass estimate is the number of memory accesses.
    For example, suppose analysis indicates that address lookup in a router is a bottleneck (e.g., because
there are fast switches to make data transfer not a bottleneck). Suppose the standard algorithm takes an
70       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



average of 15 memory accesses while a new algorithm indicates a worst case of 3 memory accesses.
This suggests a factor of 5 improvement, which makes it interesting to proceed further.

Q5: Is it worth adding custom hardware?
With the continued improvement in the price–performance of general-purpose processors, it is tempting
to implement algorithms in software and ride the price–performance curve. Thus if we are considering
a piece of custom hardware that takes a year to design, and the resulting price–performance improve-
ment is only a factor of 2, it may not be worth the effort. On the other hand, hardware design times
are shrinking with the advent of effective synthesis tools. Volume manufacturing can also result in ex-
tremely small costs (compared to general-purpose processors) for a custom-designed chip. Having an
edge for even a small period such as a year in a competitive market is attractive. This has led companies
to increasingly place networking functions in silicon.

Q6: Can protocol changes be avoided?
Through the years there have been several proposals denouncing particular protocols as being inef-
ficient and proposing alternative protocols designed for performance. For example, in the 1980s, the
transport protocol TCP was considered “slow” and a protocol called XTP (Chesson, 1989) was explic-
itly designed to be implemented in hardware. This stimulated research into making TCP fast, which
culminated in Van Jacobson’s fast implementation of TCP (Clark et al., 1989) in the standard BSD
(Berkeley software distribution) release. More recently, proposals for protocol changes (e.g., tag and
flow switching) to finesse the need for IP lookups have stimulated research into fast IP lookups.

Q7: Do prototypes confirm the initial promise?
Once we have successfully answered all the preceding questions, it is still a good idea to build a pro-
totype or simulation and actually test to see if the improvement is real. This is because we are dealing
with complex systems; the initial analysis rarely captures all effects encountered in practice. For ex-
ample, understanding that the Web-image-dumping idea does not improve latency (see Case Study 1)
might come only after a real implementation and tests with a network analyzer.
    A major problem is finding a standard set of benchmarks to compare the standard and new imple-
mentations. For example, in the general systems world, despite some disagreement, there are standard
benchmarks for floating-point performance (e.g., Whetstone) or database performance (e.g., debit–
credit). If one claims to reduce Web transfer latencies using differential encoding, what set of Web
pages provides a reasonable benchmark to prove this contention? If one claims to have an IP lookup
scheme with small storage, which benchmark databases can be used to support this assertion?

Q8: Will performance gains be lost if the environment changes?
Sadly, the job is not quite over even if a prototype implementation is built and a benchmark shows that
performance improvements are close to initial projections. The difficulty is that the improvement may
be specific to the particular platform used (which can change) and may take advantage of properties
of a certain benchmark (which may not reflect all environments in which the system will be used).
The improvements may still be worthwhile, but some form of sensitivity analysis is still useful for the
future.
    For example, Van Jacobson performed a major optimization of the BSD networking code that al-
lowed ordinary workstations to saturate 100-Mbps FDDI (Fiber Distributed Data Interface) rings. The
                                                                                 3.7 Exercises          71



optimization, which we will study in detail in Chapter 9, assumes that in the normal case the next packet
is from the same connection as the previous packet, P , and has sequence number one higher than P .
Will this assumption hold for servers that have thousands of simultaneous connections to clients? Will
it hold if packets get sent over parallel links in the network, resulting in packet reordering? Fortunately,
the code has worked well in practice for a number of years. Despite this, such questions alert us to
possible future dangers.



3.6 Summary
This chapter introduced a set of principles for efficient system implementation. A summary can be
found in Figs. 3.1–3.3. The principles were illustrated with examples drawn from compilers, archi-
tecture, databases, algorithms, and networks to show broad applicability to computer systems. Chef
Charlie’s examples, while somewhat tongue in cheek, show that these principles also extend to general
systems, from restaurants to state governments. While the broad focus is on performance, cost is an
equally important metric. One can cast problems in the form of finding the fastest solution for a given
cost. Optimization of other metrics, such as bandwidth, storage, and computation, can be subsumed
under the cost metric.
    A preview of well-known networking applications of the 15 principles can be found in Figs. 3.1–3.3.
These applications will be explained in detail in later chapters. The first five principles encourage
systems thinking. The next five principles encourage a fresh look at system modularity. The last five
principles point to useful ways to speed up individual subsystems.
    Just as chess strategies are boring until one plays a game of chess, implementation principles are
lifeless without concrete examples. The reader is encouraged to try the following exercises, which
provide more examples drawn from computer systems. The principles will be applied to networks in
the remaining chapters. In particular, the next chapter seeks to engage the reader by providing a set of
15 self-contained networking problems to play with.



3.7 Exercises
1. Batching, Disk Locality, and Logs: Most serious databases use log files for performance. Because
   writes to disk are expensive, it is cheaper to update only a memory image of a record. However,
   because a crash can occur at any time, the update must also be recorded on disk. This can be done
   by directly updating the record location on disk, but random writes to disk are expensive (see P4a).
   Instead, information on the update is written to a sequential log file. The log entry contains the
   record location, the old value (undo information), and the new value (redo information).
   • Suppose a disk page of 4000 bytes can be written using one disk I/O and that a log record is
     50 bytes. If we apply batching (2c), what is a reasonable strategy for updating the log? What
     fraction of a disk I/O should be charged to a log update?
   • Before a transaction that does the update can commit (i.e., tell the user it is done), it must be
     sure the log is written. Why? Explain why this leads to another form of batching, group commit,
     where multiple transactions are committed together.
72       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



   • If the database represented by the log gets too far ahead of the database represented on disk,
     crash recovery can take too long. Describe a strategy to bound crash recovery times.
2. Relaxing Consistency Requirements in a Name Service: The Grapevine system (Birell et al.,
   1982) offers a combination of a name service (to translate user names to inboxes) and a mail service.
   To improve availability, Grapevine name servers are replicated. Thus any update to a registration
   record (e.g., Joe → MailSlot3) must be performed on all servers implementing replicas of that
   record. Standard database techniques for distributed databases require that each update be atomic;
   that is, the effect should be as if updates were done simultaneously on all replicas. Because atomic
   updates require that all servers be available, and registration information is not as important as,
   say, bank accounts, Grapevine provides only the following loose semantics (P3): All replicas will
   eventually agree if updates stop. Each update is timestamped and passed from one replica to the
   other in arbitrary order. The highest timestamped update wins.
   • Give an example of how a user could detect inconsistency in Joe’s registration during the con-
     vergence process.
   • If Joe’s record is deleted, it should eventually be purged from the database to save storage. Sup-
     pose a server purges Joe’s record immediately after receiving a Delete update. Why might Add
     updates possibly cause a problem? Suggest a solution.
   • The rule that the latest timestamp wins does not work well when two administrators try to create
     an entry with the same name. Because a later creation could be trapped in a crashed server,
     the administrator of the earlier creation can never know for sure that his creation has won. The
     Grapevine designers did not introduce mechanisms to solve this problem but relied on “some
     human-level centralization of name creation.” Explain their assumption clearly.
3. Replacing General-Purpose Routines with Special-Purpose Routines and Efficient Storage
   Allocators: Consider the design of a general storage allocator that is given control of a large contigu-
   ous piece of memory and may be asked by applications for smaller, variable-size chunks. A general
   allocator is quite complex: As time goes by, the available memory fragments and time must be spent
   finding a piece of the requested size and coalescing adjacent released pieces into larger free blocks.
   • Briefly sketch the design of a general-purpose allocator. Consult a textbook such as Horowitz
     and Sahni (1978) for examples of allocators.
   • Suppose a profile has shown that a large fraction of the applications ask for 64 bytes of storage.
     Describe a more efficient allocator that works for the special case (P6) of allocating just 64-byte
     quantities.
   • How would you optimize the expected case (P11) and yet handle requests for storage other than
     64 bytes?
4. Passing Information in Interfaces: Consider a file system that is reading or writing files from
   disk. Each random disk Read/Write involves positioning the disk over the correct track (seeking).
   If we have a sequence of, say, three Reads to Tracks 1, 15, and 7, it may pay to reorder the second
   and third Reads to reduce waste in terms of seek times. Clearly, as in P1, the larger the context of
   the optimization (e.g., the number of Reads or Writes considered for reordering), the greater the
   potential benefits of such seek optimization.
                                                                                3.7 Exercises          73



   A normal file system only has an interface to open, read, and write a single file. However, suppose
   an application is reading multiple files and can pass that information (P9) in the file system call.
   • What information about the pattern of file accesses would be useful for the file system to perform
     seek optimization? What should the interface look like?
   • Give examples of applications that process multiple files and could benefit from this optimization.
     For more details, see the paper by Patterson et al. (1995). They call this form of tip a disclosure.
5. Optimizing the Expected Case, Using Algorithmic Ideas, and Scavenging Files: The Alto com-
   puter used a scavenging system (Lampson, 1989) that scans the disk after a crash to reconstruct file
   system indexes that map from file names and blocks to disk sectors. This can be done because each
   disk sector that contains a file block also contains the corresponding file identifier. What complicates
   matters is that the main memory is not large enough to hold information for every disk sector. Thus
   a single scan that builds a list in memory for each file will not work. Assume that the information
   for a single file will fit into memory. Thus a way that will work is to make a single scan of the disk
   for each file, but that would be obvious waste (P1) and too slow.
   Instead, observe that in the expected case, most files are allocated contiguously. Thus suppose File
   X has pages 1–1000 located on disk sectors 301–1300. Thus the information about 1000 sectors can
   be compactly represented by three integers and a file name. Call this a run node.
   • Assume the expected case holds and that all run nodes can fit in memory. Assume also that the
     file index for each file is an array (stored on disk) that maps from file block number to disk sector
     number. Show how to rebuild all the file indexes.
   • Now suppose the expected case does not hold and that the run nodes do not all fit into memory.
     Describe a technique, based on the algorithmic idea of divide-and-conquer (P15), that is guaran-
     teed to work (without reverting to the naive idea of building the index for one file at a time unless
     strictly necessary).
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                                                               CHAPTER


Principles in action
                                                                                                                   4
                              System architecture and design, like any art, can only be learned by doing. . . . The space of
                                                                      possibilities unfolds only as the medium is worked.
                                                                                           —Carver Mead and Lynn Conway


                                             Having rounded up my horses, I now set myself to put them through their paces.
                                                                                                            —Arnold Toynbee



The previous chapter outlined 15 principles for efficient network protocol implementation. Part 2 of the
book begins a detailed look at specific network bottlenecks such as data copying and control transfer.
While the principles are used in these later chapters, the focus of these later chapters is on the specific
bottleneck being examined. Given that network algorithmics is as much a way of thinking as it is a
set of techniques, it seems useful to round out Part 1 by seeing the principles in action on small, self-
contained, but nontrivial network problems.
    Thus this chapter provides examples of applying the principles in solving specific networking prob-
lems. The examples are drawn from real problems, and some of the solutions are used in real products.
Unlike subsequent chapters, this chapter is not a collection of new material followed by a set of exer-
cises. Instead, this chapter can be thought of as an extended set of exercises.
    In Sections 4.1 to 4.15 15 problems are motivated and described. Each problem is followed by a
hint that suggests specific principles, which is then followed by a solution sketch. There are also a few
exercises after each solution. In classes and seminars on the topic of this chapter, the audience enjoyed
inventing solutions by themselves (after a few hints were provided), rather than directly seeing the final
solutions.


    Quick reference guide
    In an ideal world, each problem should have something interesting for every reader. For those readers pressed for time,
    however, here is some guidance. Hardware designers looking to sample a few problems may wish to try their hand at
    designing an Ethernet monitor (Section 4.4) or doing a binary search on long identifiers (Section 4.14). Systems people
    looking for examples of how systems thinking can finesse algorithmic expertise may wish to tackle a problem on applica-
    tion device channels (Section 4.1) or a problem on compressing the connection table (Section 4.11). Algorithm designers
    may be interested in the problem of identifying a resource hog (Section 4.10) and a problem on the use of protocol design
    changes to simplify an implementation problem in link state routing (Section 4.8).




Network Algorithmics. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-809927-8.00009-9
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                                            75
76        Chapter 4 Principles in action




4.1 Buffer validation of application device channels
Usually, application programs can only send network data through the operating system kernel, and only
the kernel is allowed to talk to the network adaptor. This restriction prevents different applications from
(maliciously or accidentally) writing or reading each other’s data. However, communication through
the kernel adds overhead in the form of system calls (see Chapter 2). In application device channels
(ADCs), the idea is to allow an application to send data to and from the network by directly writing
to the memory of the network adaptor. Refer to Chapter 5 for more details. One mechanism to ensure
protection, in lieu of kernel mediation, is to have the kernel set up the adaptor with a set of valid memory
pages for each application. The network adaptor must then ensure that the application’s data can only
be sent and received from memory in the valid set.
    In Fig. 4.1, for example, application P is allowed to send and receive data from a set of valid pages
X, Y, . . . , L, A. Suppose application P queues a request to the adaptor to receive the next packet for P
into a buffer in page A. Since this request is sent directly to the adaptor, the kernel cannot check that
this is a valid buffer for P . Instead, the adaptor must validate this request by ensuring that A is in the
set of valid pages. If the adaptor does not perform this check, application P could supply an invalid
page belonging to some other application, and the adaptor would write P ’s data into the wrong page.
The need for a check leads to the following problem.

Problem
When application P does a Receive, the adaptor must validate whether the page belongs to the valid
page set for P . If the set of pages is organized as a linear list (Druschel et al., 1994), then validation can
cost O(n), where n is the number of pages in the set. For instance, in Fig. 4.1, since A is at the end of
the list of valid pages, the adaptor must traverse the entire list before it finds A. If n is large, this can be
expensive and can slow down the rate at which the adaptor can send and receive packets. How can the




FIGURE 4.1
In application device channels, the network adaptor is given a set of valid pages (X, Y, L, A, etc.) for a given ap-
plication P . When application P makes a request to receive data into page A, the adaptor must check if A is in the
valid list before allowing the receive.
                                     4.1 Buffer validation of application device channels                         77



validation process be sped up? Try thinking through the solution before reading the hint and solutions
that follow.

Hint: A good approach to reduce the complexity of validation is to use a better data structure than
a list (P15). Which data structure would you choose? However, one can improve worst-case behavior
even further and get smaller constant factors by using system thinking and by passing hints in
interfaces (P9).
    An algorithmic thinker will immediately consider implementing the set of valid pages as a hash
table instead of a list. This provides an O(1) average search time. Hashing has two disadvan-
tages: (1) good hash functions that have small collision probabilities are expensive computationally;
(2) hashing does not provide a good worst-case bound. Binary search does provide logarithmic worst-
case search times, but this is expensive (it also requires keeping the set sorted) if the set of pages
is large and packet transmission rates are higher. Instead, we replace the hash table lookup by an
indexed array lookup, as follows (try using P9 before you read on).


Solution
The adaptor stores the set of valid pages for each application in an array, as shown in Fig. 4.2. This array
is updated only when the kernel updates the set of valid pages for the application. When the application
does a Receive into page A, it also passes to the adaptor a handle (P9). The handle is the index of the
array position where A is stored. The adaptor can use this to quickly confirm whether the page in the
Receive request matches the page stored in the handle. The cost of validation is a bounds check (to see
if the handle is a valid index), one array lookup, and one compare.

Exercises

• Is the handle a hint or a tip? Let’s invoke principle P1: If this is a handle, why pass the page number
  (e.g., A) in the interface? Why does removing the page number speed up the confirmation task
  slightly?




FIGURE 4.2
Finessing the need for a hash table lookup by passing a handle across the interface between the application and
adaptor.
78        Chapter 4 Principles in action



• To find the array corresponding to application P normally requires a hash table search using P as
  the key. This weakens the argument for getting rid of the hash table search to check if the page is
  valid—unless, of course, the hash search of P can be finessed as well. How can this be done?



4.2 Scheduler for asynchronous transfer mode flow control
In asynchronous transfer mode (ATM), an ATM adaptor may have hundreds of simultaneous virtual
circuits (VCs) that can send data (called cells). Each VC is often flow controlled in some way to limit
the rate at which it can send. For example, in rate-based flow control, a VC may receive credits to send
cells at fixed time intervals. On the other hand, in credit-based flow control (Kung et al., 1994; Ozveren
et al., 1994), credits may be sent by the next node in the path when buffers free up.
    Thus in Fig. 4.3 the adaptor has a table that holds the VC state. There are four VCs that have been
set up (1, 3, 5, 7). Of these, only VCs 1, 5, and 7 have some cells to send. Finally, only VCs 1 and
7 have credits to send cells. Thus the next cell to be sent by the adaptor should be from either one of
the eligible VCs: 1 or 7. The selection from the eligible VCs should be done fairly, for example, in
round-robin fashion. If the adaptor chooses to send a cell from VC 7, the adaptor would decrement the
credits of VC 7 to 1. Since there are no more cells to be sent, VC 7 now becomes ineligible. Choosing
the next eligible VC leads to the following problem.

Problem
A naive scheduler may cycle through the VC array looking for a VC that is eligible. If many of the VCs
are ineligible, this can be quite inefficient, for the scheduler may have to step through several VCs that
are ineligible to send one cell from an eligible VC. How can this inefficiency be avoided?
Hint: Consider invoking P12 to add some extra state to speed up the scheduler main loop. What
state can you add to avoid stepping through ineligible VCs? How would you maintain this state
efficiently?




FIGURE 4.3
An ATM VC is eligible to send data if it is active (has some outstanding cells to send in the queue shown below the
VC) and has credits (shown by gray dots above the VC). The problem is to select the next eligible VC in some fair
manner without stepping through VCs that are ineligible.
                                         4.3 Route computation using Dijkstra’s algorithm                  79




FIGURE 4.4
Maintaining a list of eligible VCs to speed up the scheduler main loop.


Solution
Maintain a list (Fig. 4.4) of eligible VCs in addition to the VC table of Fig. 4.3. The only problem is to
efficiently maintain this state. This is the major difficulty in using P12. If the state is too expensive to
maintain, the added state is a liability and not an asset. Recall that a VC is eligible if it has both cells to
send and has credits. Thus a VC is removed from the list after service if VC becomes inactive or has no
more credits; if not, the VC is added to the tail of the list to ensure fairness. A VC is added to the tail
of the list either when a cell arrives to an empty VC cell queue and this (empty) queue also has credits
or when the VC has no credits and receives a credit update.

Exercises

• How can you be sure that a VC is not added multiple times to the eligible list?
• Can this scheme be generalized to allow some VCs to get more opportunities to send than other VCs
  based on a weight assigned by a manager?




4.3 Route computation using Dijkstra’s algorithm
How does a router S decide how to route a packet to a given destination D? Every link in a network is
labeled with a cost, and routers like S often compute the shortest (i.e., lowest-cost) paths to destinations
within a local domain. Assume the cost is a small integer. Recall from Chapter 2 that the most com-
monly used routing protocol within a domain is OSPF (Open Shortest Path First) based on link state
routing.
    In link state routing, every router in a subnet sends a link state packet (LSP) that lists its links to
all of its neighbors. Each LSP is sent to every other router in the subnet. Each router sends its LSP
to other routers using a primitive flooding protocol (Perlman, 1992). Once every router receives an
LSP from every router, then every router has a complete map of the network. Assuming the topology
remains stable, each router can now calculate its shortest path to every other node in the network using
a standard shortest-path algorithm, such as Dijkstra’s algorithm (Cormen et al., 1990).
    In Fig. 4.5 source S wishes to calculate a shortest-path tree to all other nodes (A, B, C, D) in the
network. The network is shown on the left frame in Fig. 4.5 with links numbered with their costs. In
Dijkstra’s algorithm S begins by placing only itself in the shortest-path tree. S also updates the cost
to reach all its direct neighbors (e.g., B, A). At each iteration, Dijkstra’s algorithm adds to the current
80        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.5
In Dijkstra’s algorithm the source S builds a shortest-path tree rooted at S. At each stage, the closest node not in the
tree is added to the tree.



tree the node that is closest to the current tree. The costs of the neighbors of this newly added node are
updated. The process repeats until all nodes in the network belong to the tree.
    For instance, in Fig. 4.5, after adding S, the algorithm picks B and then picks A. At this iteration,
the tree is as shown on the right in Fig. 4.5. The solid lines show the existing tree, and the dotted lines
show the best current connections to nodes that are not already in the tree. Thus since A has a cost of
2 and there is a link of cost 3 from A to C, C is labeled with 5. Similarly, D is labeled with a cost of
3 for the path through B. At the next iteration, the algorithm picks D as the least-cost node not already
in the tree. The cost to C is then updated using the route through D. Finally, C is added to the tree in
the last iteration.
    This textbook solution requires determining the node with the least cost that is not already in the
tree at each iteration. The standard data structure to keep track of the minimum-value element in a
dynamically changing set is a priority queue. This leads to the following problem.

Problem
Dijkstra’s algorithm requires a priority queue at each of N iterations, where N is the number of network
nodes. The best general-purpose priority queues, such as heaps (Cormen et al., 1990), take O(log N )
cost to find the minimum element. This implies a total running time of O(N log N ) time. For a large
network, this can result in slow response to failures and other network topology changes. How can route
computation be speeded up?
Hint: Consider exploiting the fact that the link costs are small integers (P14) by using an array to
represent the current costs of nodes. How can you efficiently, at least in an amortized sense, find
the next minimum-cost node to include in the shortest-path tree?

Solution
The fact that the link costs are small integers can be exploited to construct a priority queue based on
bucket sorting (P14). Assume that the largest link cost is MaxLinkCost. Thus the maximum cost of a
path can be no more than Diam ∗ MaxLinkCost, where Diam is the diameter of the network. Assume
Diam is also a small integer. Thus one could imagine using an array with a location for every possible
cost c in the range 1 . . . Diam ∗ MaxLinkCost. If during the course of Dijkstra’s algorithm the current
                                        4.3 Route computation using Dijkstra’s algorithm               81




FIGURE 4.6
Using a priority queue based on bucket sorting to speed up Dijkstra’s algorithm.


cost of a node X is c, then node X can be placed in a list pointed to by element c of the array (Fig. 4.6).
This leads to the following algorithm.
    Whenever a node X changes its cost from c to c , node X is removed from the list for c and added to
the list for c . But how is the minimum element to be found? This can be done by initializing a pointer
called CurrentMin to 0 (which corresponds to the cost of S). Each time the algorithm wishes to find the
minimum-cost node not in the tree, CurrentMin is incremented by 1 until an array location is reached
that contains a nonempty list. Any node in this list can then be added to the tree. The algorithm costs
O(N + Diam ∗ MaxLinkCost) because the work done in advancing CurrentMin can at most be the size
of the array. This can be significantly better than N log N for large N and small values of Diam and
MaxLinkCost.
    A crucial factor in being able to efficiently use a bucket sort priority queue of the kind described
earlier is that the node costs are always ahead of the value of CurrentMin. This is a monotonicity
condition. If it were not true, the algorithm would start checking for the minimum from 1 at each
iteration, instead of starting from the last value of CurrentMin and never backing up. The monotonicity
condition is fairly obvious for Dijktra’s algorithm because the costs of nodes not already in the tree
have to be larger than the costs of nodes that are already in the tree.
    Fig. 4.6 shows the state of the bucket sort priority queue after A has been added to the tree. This
corresponds to the right frame of Fig. 4.5. At this stage, CurrentMin = 2, which is the cost of A. At the
next iteration, CurrentMin will advance to 3, and D will be added to the tree. This will result in the C’s
cost being reduced to 4. We thus remove C from the list in position 5 and add it to the empty list in
position 4. CurrentMin is then advanced to 4, and C is added to the tree.

Exercises

• The algorithm requires a node to be removed from a list and added to another, earlier list. How can
  this be done efficiently?
• In Fig. 4.6 how can the algorithm know that it can terminate after adding C to the tree instead of
  advancing to the end of the long array?
• In networks that have failures, the concept of diameter is a highly suspect one because the diameter
  could change considerably after a failure. Consider a wheel topology where all N nodes have diam-
82       Chapter 4 Principles in action



  eter 2 through a central spoke node; if the central spoke node fails, the diameter goes up to N/2. In
  actual practice the diameter is often small. Can this cause problems in sizing the array?
• Can you circumvent the problem of the diameter completely by replacing the linear array of Fig. 4.6
  with a circular array of size MaxLinkCost? Explain. The resulting solution is known as Dial’s
  algorithm (Ahuja et al., 1993).



4.4 Ethernet monitor using bridge hardware
Alyssa P. Hacker is working for Acme Networks and knows of the Ethernet bridge invented at Acme.
A bridge (see Chapter 10) is a device that can connect Ethernets together. To forward packets from one
Ethernet to another, the bridge must look up the 48-bit destination address in an Ethernet packet at high
speeds.
    Alyssa decides to convert the bridge into an Ethernet traffic monitor that will passively listen to
an Ethernet and produce statistics about traffic patterns. The marketing person tells her that she needs
to monitor traffic between arbitrary source–destination pairs. Thus for every active source–destination
pair, such as A, B, Alyssa must keep a variable PA,B that measures the number of packets sent from A
to B since the monitor was started. When a packet is sent from A to B, the monitor (which is listening
to all packets sent on the cable) will pick up a copy of the packet. If the source is A and the destination is
B, the monitor should increment PA,B . The problem is to do this in 64 µsec, the minimum interpacket
time on the Ethernet. The bottleneck is the lookup of the state PA,B associated with a pair of 48-bit
addresses A, B.
    Fortunately, the bridge hardware has a spiffy lookup hardware engine that can look up the state
associated with a single 48-bit address in 1.4 µsec. A call to the hardware can be expressed as Lookup(X,
D), where X is the 48-bit key and D is the database to be searched. The call returns the state associated
with X in 1.4 µsec for databases of less than 64,000 keys. What Alyssa must solve is the following
problem.

Problem
The monitor needs to update state for AB when a packet from A to B arrives. The monitor has a lookup
engine that can look up only single addresses and not address pairs. How can Alyssa use the existing
engine to look up address pairs? The problem is illustrated in Fig. 4.7.

Hint: The problem requires using P4c to exploit the existing bridge hardware. Since 1.4 µsec is
much smaller than 64 µsec, the design can afford to use more than one hardware lookup. How can
a 96-bit lookup be reduced to a 48-bit lookup using three lookups?
    A naive solution is to use two lookups to convert source A and destination B into smaller
(<24-bit) indices IA and IB . The indices IA and IB can then be used to look up a two-dimensional
array that stores the state for AB. This requires only two hardware lookups plus one more mem-
ory access, but it can require large amounts of memory. If there are 1000 possible sources and
1000 possible destinations, the array must contain a million entries. In practice, there may be
only 20,000 active source–destination pairs. How could you make the required amount of memory
proportional to the number of actual source–destination pairs?
                                                4.4 Ethernet monitor using bridge hardware                        83




FIGURE 4.7
Adapting an engine that does destination lookups to doing source-destination lookups.




FIGURE 4.8
Converting a 96-bit lookup into a 48-bit lookup by first converting each 48-bit address into a 24-bit index and
concatenating the indices.




Solution
As before, first use one lookup each to convert source A and destination B into smaller (<24-bit)
indices IA and IB . Then use a third lookup to map from IA IB to AB state. The solution is illustrated in
Fig. 4.8. The third lookup effectively compresses the two-dimensional array of the naive solution. This
solution is due to Mark Kempf and Mike Soha.

Exercises

• Can this problem be solved using only two bridge hardware lookups without requiring extra mem-
  ory?
• The set of active source–destination pairs may change with time because some pairs of addresses
  stop communicating for long periods. How can this be handled without keeping the state for every
  possible address pair that has communicated since the monitor was powered on?
