20       Chapter 2 Network implementation models



    Fig. 2.2 also depicts several generic functions shared by many protocols. First, protocols have a
crucial state that must be looked up at high speeds and sometimes manipulated. For instance, a received
TCP packet causes TCP to look up a table of connection state, while a received IP packet causes IP
to look up a forwarding table. Second, protocols need to efficiently set timers, for example, to con-
trol retransmission in TCP. Third, if a protocol module is handling several different clients, it needs
to schedule these clients efficiently. For instance, TCP must schedule the processing of different con-
nections, while a router must make sure that unruly conversations between some pair of computers do
not lock out other conversations. Many protocols also allow large pieces of data to be fragmented into
smaller pieces that need reassembly.
    One of the major theses of this book is that though such generic functions are often expensive, their
cost can be mitigated with the right techniques. Thus each generic protocol function is worth studying in
isolation. Therefore after Part 1 of this book, the remaining chapters address specific protocol functions
for endnodes and routers.


2.1.3 Performance environment and measures
This section describes some important measures and performance assumptions. Consider a system
(such as a network or even a single router) where jobs (such as messages) arrive and, after completion,
leave. The two most important metrics in networks are throughput and latency. Throughput roughly
measures the number of jobs completed per second. Latency measures the time (typically the worst
case) to complete a job. System owners (e.g., ISPs, routers) seek to maximize throughput to maximize
revenues, while users of a system want end-to-end latencies lower than a few hundred milliseconds.
Latency also affects the speed of computation across the network, as, for example, in the performance
of a remote procedure call.
    The following performance-related observations about the Internet milieu are helpful when consid-
ering implementation trade-offs.
• Link Speeds: Backbone links are upgrading to 10 Gbps and 40 Gbps, and local links are upgrading
  to gigabit speeds. However, wireless and home links are currently orders of magnitude slower.
• TCP and Web Dominance: Web traffic accounts for over 70% of traffic in bytes or packets. Similarly,
  TCP accounts for 90% of traffic in a recent study (Braun, 1998).
• Small Transfers: Most Web documents accessed are small; for example, a SPEC (Carlton, 1996)
  study shows that 50% of accessed files are 50 kilobytes (KB) or less.
• Poor Latencies: Real round-trip delays exceed speed-of-light limitations; measurements in Crovella
  and Carter (1995) report a mean of 241 msec across the United States compared to speed-of-light
  delays of less than 30 msec. Increased latency can be caused by efforts to improve throughput, such
  as batch compression at modems and pipelining in routers.
• Poor Locality: Backbone traffic studies (Thompson et al., 1997) show 250,000 different source–
  destination pairs (sometimes called flows) passing through a router in a very short duration. More
  recent estimates show around a million concurrent flows. Aggregating groups of headers with the
  same destination address or other means does not reduce the number of header classes significantly.
  Thus locality, or the likelihood of computation invested in a packet being reused on a future packet,
  is small.
• Small Packets: Thompson et al. (1997) also show that roughly half the packets received by a router
  are minimum-size 40-byte TCP acknowledgments. To avoid losing important packets in a stream
                                                                                             2.1 Protocols             21



  of minimum-size packets, most router- and network-adaptor vendors aim for “wire-speed forward-
  ing”—this is the ability to process minimum-size (40-byte) packets at the speed of the input link.1
• Critical Measures: It is worth distinguishing between global performance measures, such as end-
  to-end delay and bandwidth, and local performance measures, such as router lookup speeds. While
  global performance measures are crucial to overall network performance, this book focuses only on
  local performance measures, which are a key piece of the puzzle. In particular, this book focuses on
  forwarding performance and resource (e.g., memory, logic) measures.
• Tools: Most network management tools, such as HP’s OpenView, deal with global measures. The
  tools needed for local measures are tools to measure performance within computers, such as profiling
  software. Examples include Rational’s Quantify (http://www.rational.com) for application soft-
  ware, Intel’s VTune (www.intel.com/software/products/vtune/), and even hardware oscilloscopes.
  Network monitors such as tcpdump (www.tcpdump.org) are also useful.

                                    Case Study 1: SANs and iSCSI
       This case study shows that protocol features can greatly affect application performance. Many
   large data centers connect their disk drives and computers together using a storage area network
   (SAN). This allows computers to share disks. Currently, storage area networks are based on Fiber-
   Channel (Benner, 1995) components, which are more expensive than, say, Gigabit Ethernet. The
   proponents of iSCSI (Internet storage) (Satran et al., 2001) protocols seek to replace FiberChannel
   protocols with (hopefully cheaper) TCP/IP protocols and components.
       SCSI is the protocol used by computers to communicate with local disks. It can also be used
   to communicate with disks across a network. A single SCSI command could ask to read 10
   megabytes (MB) of data from a remote disk. Currently, such remote SCSI commands run over
   a FiberChannel transport protocol implemented in the network adaptors. Thus a 10-MB transfer is
   broken up into multiple FiberChannel packets, sent, delivered, and acknowledged (acked) without
   any per-packet processing by the requesting computer or responding disk.
       The obvious approach to reduce costs is to replace the proprietary FiberChannel transport
   layer with TCP and the FiberChannel network layer with IP. This would allow us to replace ex-
   pensive FiberChannel switches in SANs with commodity Ethernet switches. However, this has
   three implications. First, to compete with FiberChannel performance, TCP will probably have
   to be implemented in hardware. Second, TCP sends and delivers a byte stream (see Fig. A.1 in
   Appendix if needed). Thus multiple sent SCSI messages can be merged at the receiver. Message
   boundaries must be recovered by adding another iSCSI header containing the length of the next
   SCSI message.
       The third implication is trickier. Storage vendors (Satran et al., 2001) wish to process SCSI
   commands out of order. If two independent SCSI messages C1 and C2 are sent in order but the
   C2 data arrives before C1, TCP will buffer C2 until C1 arrives. But the storage enthusiast wishes
   to steer C2 directly to a preallocated SCSI buffer and process C2 out of order, a prospect that
   makes the TCP purist cringe. The length field method described earlier fails for this purpose




1 The preoccupation with wire-speed forwarding in networking is extremely different from the mentality in computer architec-
ture, which is content with optimizing typical (and not worst-case) performance as measured on benchmarks.
22       Chapter 2 Network implementation models



  because a missing TCP segment (containing the SCSI message length) makes it impossible to find
  later message boundaries. An alternate proposal suggests having the iSCSI layer insert headers at
  periodic intervals in the TCP byte stream, but the jury is still out.




2.2 Hardware
As links approach 40-gigabit/sec OC-768 speeds, a 40-byte packet must be forwarded in 8 nsec. At such
speeds, packet forwarding is typically directly implemented in hardware instead of on a programmable
processor. You cannot participate in the design process of such hardware-intensive designs without
understanding the tools and constraints of hardware designers. And yet, a few simple models can allow
you to understand and even play with hardware designs. Even if you have no familiarity with and
have a positive distaste for hardware, you are invited to take a quick tour of hardware design, full of
networking examples to keep you awake.
   Internet lookups are often implemented using combinational logic, Internet packets are stored in
router memories, and an Internet router is put together with components such as switches and lookup
chips. Thus our tour begins with logic implementation, continues with memory internals, and ends
with component-based design. For more details, we refer the reader to the classic VLSI text (Mead
and Conway, 1980), which still wears well despite its age, and the classic computer architecture text
(Hennessey and Patterson, 1996).


2.2.1 Combinatorial logic
Section A.2.1 in Appendix describes very simple models of basic hardware gates, such as NOT, NAND,
and NOR, that can be understood by even a software designer who is willing to read a few pages.
However, even knowing how basic gates are implemented is not required to have some insight into
hardware design.
    The first key to understanding logic design is the following observation. Given NOT, NAND, and
NOR gates, Boolean algebra shows that any Boolean function f (I1 , . . . , In ) of n inputs can be imple-
mented. Each bit of a multibit output can be considered a function of the input bits. Logic minimization
is often used to eliminate redundant gates and sometimes to increase speed. For example, if + denotes
OR and · denotes AND, then the function O = I1 · I2 + I1 · I2 can be simplified to O = I1 .

Example 1. Quality of Service and Priority Encoders: Suppose we have a network router that maintains
n output packet queues for a link, where queue i has higher priority than queue j if i < j . This problem
comes under the category of providing quality of service (QoS), which is covered in Chapter 14. The
transmit scheduler in the router must pick a packet from the first nonempty packet queue in priority
order. Assume the scheduler maintains an N -bit vector (bitmap) I such that I [ j ] = 1 if and only if
queue j is nonempty. Then the scheduler can find the highest-priority nonempty queue by finding the
smallest position in I in which a bit is set. Hardware designers know this function intimately as a
priority encoder. However, even a software designer should realize that this function is feasible for
hardware implementation for reasonable n. This function is examined more closely in Example 2.
