                                                                                   3.5 Caveats          69



      of strings went over 100, the trie did not fit in cache, and performance suffered. Thus the
      system had to be reimplemented to use collections of smaller sets that took into account the
      hardware (P4).
  A useful lesson from this case study is that purported improvements may not really target the
  bottleneck (which in the trace appears to be single-string matching) and can also interact with
  other parts of the system (the data cache).



3.5.1 Eight cautionary questions
In the spirit of the two case studies, here are eight cautionary questions that warn against the injudicious
use of the principles.

Q1: Is it worth improving performance?
If one were to sell the system as a product, is performance a major selling strength? People interested
in performance improvement would like to think so, but other aspects of a system, such as ease of use,
functionality, and robustness, may be more important. For example, a user of a network management
product cares more about features than performance. Thus, given limited resources and implementation
complexity, we may choose to defer optimizations until needed. Even if performance is important,
which performance metric (e.g., latency throughput, memory) is important?
    Other things being equal, simplicity is best. Simple systems are easier to understand, debug, and
maintain. On the other hand, the definition of simplicity changes with technology and time. Some
amount of complexity is worthwhile for large performance gains. For example, years ago image com-
pression algorithms such as MPEG were considered too complex to implement in software or hardware.
However, with increasing chip densities, many MPEG chips have come to market.

Q2: Is this really a bottleneck?
The 80–20 rule suggests that a large percentage of the performance improvements comes from op-
timizing a small fraction of the system. A simple way to start is to identify key bottlenecks for the
performance metrics we wish to optimize. One way to do so is to use profiling tools, as we did in Case
Study 2.

Q3: What impact does the change have on the rest of the system?
A simple change may speed up a portion of the system but may have complex and unforeseen effects
on the rest of the system. This is illustrated in Case Study 1. A change that improves performance but
has too many interactions should be reconsidered.

Q4: Does the initial analysis indicate significant improvement?
Before doing a complete implementation, a quick analysis can indicate how much gain is possible.
Standard complexity analysis is useful. However, when nanoseconds are at stake, constant factors are
important. For software and hardware, because memory accesses are a bottleneck, a reasonable first-
pass estimate is the number of memory accesses.
    For example, suppose analysis indicates that address lookup in a router is a bottleneck (e.g., because
there are fast switches to make data transfer not a bottleneck). Suppose the standard algorithm takes an
70       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



average of 15 memory accesses while a new algorithm indicates a worst case of 3 memory accesses.
This suggests a factor of 5 improvement, which makes it interesting to proceed further.

Q5: Is it worth adding custom hardware?
With the continued improvement in the price–performance of general-purpose processors, it is tempting
to implement algorithms in software and ride the price–performance curve. Thus if we are considering
a piece of custom hardware that takes a year to design, and the resulting price–performance improve-
ment is only a factor of 2, it may not be worth the effort. On the other hand, hardware design times
are shrinking with the advent of effective synthesis tools. Volume manufacturing can also result in ex-
tremely small costs (compared to general-purpose processors) for a custom-designed chip. Having an
edge for even a small period such as a year in a competitive market is attractive. This has led companies
to increasingly place networking functions in silicon.

Q6: Can protocol changes be avoided?
Through the years there have been several proposals denouncing particular protocols as being inef-
ficient and proposing alternative protocols designed for performance. For example, in the 1980s, the
transport protocol TCP was considered “slow” and a protocol called XTP (Chesson, 1989) was explic-
itly designed to be implemented in hardware. This stimulated research into making TCP fast, which
culminated in Van Jacobson’s fast implementation of TCP (Clark et al., 1989) in the standard BSD
(Berkeley software distribution) release. More recently, proposals for protocol changes (e.g., tag and
flow switching) to finesse the need for IP lookups have stimulated research into fast IP lookups.

Q7: Do prototypes confirm the initial promise?
Once we have successfully answered all the preceding questions, it is still a good idea to build a pro-
totype or simulation and actually test to see if the improvement is real. This is because we are dealing
with complex systems; the initial analysis rarely captures all effects encountered in practice. For ex-
ample, understanding that the Web-image-dumping idea does not improve latency (see Case Study 1)
might come only after a real implementation and tests with a network analyzer.
    A major problem is finding a standard set of benchmarks to compare the standard and new imple-
mentations. For example, in the general systems world, despite some disagreement, there are standard
benchmarks for floating-point performance (e.g., Whetstone) or database performance (e.g., debit–
credit). If one claims to reduce Web transfer latencies using differential encoding, what set of Web
pages provides a reasonable benchmark to prove this contention? If one claims to have an IP lookup
scheme with small storage, which benchmark databases can be used to support this assertion?

Q8: Will performance gains be lost if the environment changes?
Sadly, the job is not quite over even if a prototype implementation is built and a benchmark shows that
performance improvements are close to initial projections. The difficulty is that the improvement may
be specific to the particular platform used (which can change) and may take advantage of properties
of a certain benchmark (which may not reflect all environments in which the system will be used).
The improvements may still be worthwhile, but some form of sensitivity analysis is still useful for the
future.
    For example, Van Jacobson performed a major optimization of the BSD networking code that al-
lowed ordinary workstations to saturate 100-Mbps FDDI (Fiber Distributed Data Interface) rings. The
                                                                                 3.7 Exercises          71



optimization, which we will study in detail in Chapter 9, assumes that in the normal case the next packet
is from the same connection as the previous packet, P , and has sequence number one higher than P .
Will this assumption hold for servers that have thousands of simultaneous connections to clients? Will
it hold if packets get sent over parallel links in the network, resulting in packet reordering? Fortunately,
the code has worked well in practice for a number of years. Despite this, such questions alert us to
possible future dangers.



3.6 Summary
This chapter introduced a set of principles for efficient system implementation. A summary can be
found in Figs. 3.1–3.3. The principles were illustrated with examples drawn from compilers, archi-
tecture, databases, algorithms, and networks to show broad applicability to computer systems. Chef
Charlie’s examples, while somewhat tongue in cheek, show that these principles also extend to general
systems, from restaurants to state governments. While the broad focus is on performance, cost is an
equally important metric. One can cast problems in the form of finding the fastest solution for a given
cost. Optimization of other metrics, such as bandwidth, storage, and computation, can be subsumed
under the cost metric.
    A preview of well-known networking applications of the 15 principles can be found in Figs. 3.1–3.3.
These applications will be explained in detail in later chapters. The first five principles encourage
systems thinking. The next five principles encourage a fresh look at system modularity. The last five
principles point to useful ways to speed up individual subsystems.
    Just as chess strategies are boring until one plays a game of chess, implementation principles are
lifeless without concrete examples. The reader is encouraged to try the following exercises, which
provide more examples drawn from computer systems. The principles will be applied to networks in
the remaining chapters. In particular, the next chapter seeks to engage the reader by providing a set of
15 self-contained networking problems to play with.



3.7 Exercises
1. Batching, Disk Locality, and Logs: Most serious databases use log files for performance. Because
   writes to disk are expensive, it is cheaper to update only a memory image of a record. However,
   because a crash can occur at any time, the update must also be recorded on disk. This can be done
   by directly updating the record location on disk, but random writes to disk are expensive (see P4a).
   Instead, information on the update is written to a sequential log file. The log entry contains the
   record location, the old value (undo information), and the new value (redo information).
   • Suppose a disk page of 4000 bytes can be written using one disk I/O and that a log record is
     50 bytes. If we apply batching (2c), what is a reasonable strategy for updating the log? What
     fraction of a disk I/O should be charged to a log update?
   • Before a transaction that does the update can commit (i.e., tell the user it is done), it must be
     sure the log is written. Why? Explain why this leads to another form of batching, group commit,
     where multiple transactions are committed together.
72       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



   • If the database represented by the log gets too far ahead of the database represented on disk,
     crash recovery can take too long. Describe a strategy to bound crash recovery times.
2. Relaxing Consistency Requirements in a Name Service: The Grapevine system (Birell et al.,
   1982) offers a combination of a name service (to translate user names to inboxes) and a mail service.
   To improve availability, Grapevine name servers are replicated. Thus any update to a registration
   record (e.g., Joe → MailSlot3) must be performed on all servers implementing replicas of that
   record. Standard database techniques for distributed databases require that each update be atomic;
   that is, the effect should be as if updates were done simultaneously on all replicas. Because atomic
   updates require that all servers be available, and registration information is not as important as,
   say, bank accounts, Grapevine provides only the following loose semantics (P3): All replicas will
   eventually agree if updates stop. Each update is timestamped and passed from one replica to the
   other in arbitrary order. The highest timestamped update wins.
   • Give an example of how a user could detect inconsistency in Joe’s registration during the con-
     vergence process.
   • If Joe’s record is deleted, it should eventually be purged from the database to save storage. Sup-
     pose a server purges Joe’s record immediately after receiving a Delete update. Why might Add
     updates possibly cause a problem? Suggest a solution.
   • The rule that the latest timestamp wins does not work well when two administrators try to create
     an entry with the same name. Because a later creation could be trapped in a crashed server,
     the administrator of the earlier creation can never know for sure that his creation has won. The
     Grapevine designers did not introduce mechanisms to solve this problem but relied on “some
     human-level centralization of name creation.” Explain their assumption clearly.
3. Replacing General-Purpose Routines with Special-Purpose Routines and Efficient Storage
   Allocators: Consider the design of a general storage allocator that is given control of a large contigu-
   ous piece of memory and may be asked by applications for smaller, variable-size chunks. A general
   allocator is quite complex: As time goes by, the available memory fragments and time must be spent
   finding a piece of the requested size and coalescing adjacent released pieces into larger free blocks.
   • Briefly sketch the design of a general-purpose allocator. Consult a textbook such as Horowitz
     and Sahni (1978) for examples of allocators.
   • Suppose a profile has shown that a large fraction of the applications ask for 64 bytes of storage.
     Describe a more efficient allocator that works for the special case (P6) of allocating just 64-byte
     quantities.
   • How would you optimize the expected case (P11) and yet handle requests for storage other than
     64 bytes?
4. Passing Information in Interfaces: Consider a file system that is reading or writing files from
   disk. Each random disk Read/Write involves positioning the disk over the correct track (seeking).
   If we have a sequence of, say, three Reads to Tracks 1, 15, and 7, it may pay to reorder the second
   and third Reads to reduce waste in terms of seek times. Clearly, as in P1, the larger the context of
   the optimization (e.g., the number of Reads or Writes considered for reordering), the greater the
   potential benefits of such seek optimization.
                                                                                3.7 Exercises          73



   A normal file system only has an interface to open, read, and write a single file. However, suppose
   an application is reading multiple files and can pass that information (P9) in the file system call.
   • What information about the pattern of file accesses would be useful for the file system to perform
     seek optimization? What should the interface look like?
   • Give examples of applications that process multiple files and could benefit from this optimization.
     For more details, see the paper by Patterson et al. (1995). They call this form of tip a disclosure.
5. Optimizing the Expected Case, Using Algorithmic Ideas, and Scavenging Files: The Alto com-
   puter used a scavenging system (Lampson, 1989) that scans the disk after a crash to reconstruct file
   system indexes that map from file names and blocks to disk sectors. This can be done because each
   disk sector that contains a file block also contains the corresponding file identifier. What complicates
   matters is that the main memory is not large enough to hold information for every disk sector. Thus
   a single scan that builds a list in memory for each file will not work. Assume that the information
   for a single file will fit into memory. Thus a way that will work is to make a single scan of the disk
   for each file, but that would be obvious waste (P1) and too slow.
   Instead, observe that in the expected case, most files are allocated contiguously. Thus suppose File
   X has pages 1–1000 located on disk sectors 301–1300. Thus the information about 1000 sectors can
   be compactly represented by three integers and a file name. Call this a run node.
   • Assume the expected case holds and that all run nodes can fit in memory. Assume also that the
     file index for each file is an array (stored on disk) that maps from file block number to disk sector
     number. Show how to rebuild all the file indexes.
   • Now suppose the expected case does not hold and that the run nodes do not all fit into memory.
     Describe a technique, based on the algorithmic idea of divide-and-conquer (P15), that is guaran-
     teed to work (without reverting to the naive idea of building the index for one file at a time unless
     strictly necessary).
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                                                               CHAPTER


Principles in action
                                                                                                                   4
                              System architecture and design, like any art, can only be learned by doing. . . . The space of
                                                                      possibilities unfolds only as the medium is worked.
                                                                                           —Carver Mead and Lynn Conway


                                             Having rounded up my horses, I now set myself to put them through their paces.
                                                                                                            —Arnold Toynbee



The previous chapter outlined 15 principles for efficient network protocol implementation. Part 2 of the
book begins a detailed look at specific network bottlenecks such as data copying and control transfer.
While the principles are used in these later chapters, the focus of these later chapters is on the specific
bottleneck being examined. Given that network algorithmics is as much a way of thinking as it is a
set of techniques, it seems useful to round out Part 1 by seeing the principles in action on small, self-
contained, but nontrivial network problems.
    Thus this chapter provides examples of applying the principles in solving specific networking prob-
lems. The examples are drawn from real problems, and some of the solutions are used in real products.
Unlike subsequent chapters, this chapter is not a collection of new material followed by a set of exer-
cises. Instead, this chapter can be thought of as an extended set of exercises.
    In Sections 4.1 to 4.15 15 problems are motivated and described. Each problem is followed by a
hint that suggests specific principles, which is then followed by a solution sketch. There are also a few
exercises after each solution. In classes and seminars on the topic of this chapter, the audience enjoyed
inventing solutions by themselves (after a few hints were provided), rather than directly seeing the final
solutions.


    Quick reference guide
    In an ideal world, each problem should have something interesting for every reader. For those readers pressed for time,
    however, here is some guidance. Hardware designers looking to sample a few problems may wish to try their hand at
    designing an Ethernet monitor (Section 4.4) or doing a binary search on long identifiers (Section 4.14). Systems people
    looking for examples of how systems thinking can finesse algorithmic expertise may wish to tackle a problem on applica-
    tion device channels (Section 4.1) or a problem on compressing the connection table (Section 4.11). Algorithm designers
    may be interested in the problem of identifying a resource hog (Section 4.10) and a problem on the use of protocol design
    changes to simplify an implementation problem in link state routing (Section 4.8).




Network Algorithmics. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-809927-8.00009-9
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                                            75
76        Chapter 4 Principles in action




4.1 Buffer validation of application device channels
Usually, application programs can only send network data through the operating system kernel, and only
the kernel is allowed to talk to the network adaptor. This restriction prevents different applications from
(maliciously or accidentally) writing or reading each other’s data. However, communication through
the kernel adds overhead in the form of system calls (see Chapter 2). In application device channels
(ADCs), the idea is to allow an application to send data to and from the network by directly writing
to the memory of the network adaptor. Refer to Chapter 5 for more details. One mechanism to ensure
protection, in lieu of kernel mediation, is to have the kernel set up the adaptor with a set of valid memory
pages for each application. The network adaptor must then ensure that the application’s data can only
be sent and received from memory in the valid set.
    In Fig. 4.1, for example, application P is allowed to send and receive data from a set of valid pages
X, Y, . . . , L, A. Suppose application P queues a request to the adaptor to receive the next packet for P
into a buffer in page A. Since this request is sent directly to the adaptor, the kernel cannot check that
this is a valid buffer for P . Instead, the adaptor must validate this request by ensuring that A is in the
set of valid pages. If the adaptor does not perform this check, application P could supply an invalid
page belonging to some other application, and the adaptor would write P ’s data into the wrong page.
The need for a check leads to the following problem.

Problem
When application P does a Receive, the adaptor must validate whether the page belongs to the valid
page set for P . If the set of pages is organized as a linear list (Druschel et al., 1994), then validation can
cost O(n), where n is the number of pages in the set. For instance, in Fig. 4.1, since A is at the end of
the list of valid pages, the adaptor must traverse the entire list before it finds A. If n is large, this can be
expensive and can slow down the rate at which the adaptor can send and receive packets. How can the




FIGURE 4.1
In application device channels, the network adaptor is given a set of valid pages (X, Y, L, A, etc.) for a given ap-
plication P . When application P makes a request to receive data into page A, the adaptor must check if A is in the
valid list before allowing the receive.
                                     4.1 Buffer validation of application device channels                         77



validation process be sped up? Try thinking through the solution before reading the hint and solutions
that follow.

Hint: A good approach to reduce the complexity of validation is to use a better data structure than
a list (P15). Which data structure would you choose? However, one can improve worst-case behavior
even further and get smaller constant factors by using system thinking and by passing hints in
interfaces (P9).
    An algorithmic thinker will immediately consider implementing the set of valid pages as a hash
table instead of a list. This provides an O(1) average search time. Hashing has two disadvan-
tages: (1) good hash functions that have small collision probabilities are expensive computationally;
(2) hashing does not provide a good worst-case bound. Binary search does provide logarithmic worst-
case search times, but this is expensive (it also requires keeping the set sorted) if the set of pages
is large and packet transmission rates are higher. Instead, we replace the hash table lookup by an
indexed array lookup, as follows (try using P9 before you read on).


Solution
The adaptor stores the set of valid pages for each application in an array, as shown in Fig. 4.2. This array
is updated only when the kernel updates the set of valid pages for the application. When the application
does a Receive into page A, it also passes to the adaptor a handle (P9). The handle is the index of the
array position where A is stored. The adaptor can use this to quickly confirm whether the page in the
Receive request matches the page stored in the handle. The cost of validation is a bounds check (to see
if the handle is a valid index), one array lookup, and one compare.

Exercises

• Is the handle a hint or a tip? Let’s invoke principle P1: If this is a handle, why pass the page number
  (e.g., A) in the interface? Why does removing the page number speed up the confirmation task
  slightly?




FIGURE 4.2
Finessing the need for a hash table lookup by passing a handle across the interface between the application and
adaptor.
78        Chapter 4 Principles in action



• To find the array corresponding to application P normally requires a hash table search using P as
  the key. This weakens the argument for getting rid of the hash table search to check if the page is
  valid—unless, of course, the hash search of P can be finessed as well. How can this be done?



4.2 Scheduler for asynchronous transfer mode flow control
In asynchronous transfer mode (ATM), an ATM adaptor may have hundreds of simultaneous virtual
circuits (VCs) that can send data (called cells). Each VC is often flow controlled in some way to limit
the rate at which it can send. For example, in rate-based flow control, a VC may receive credits to send
cells at fixed time intervals. On the other hand, in credit-based flow control (Kung et al., 1994; Ozveren
et al., 1994), credits may be sent by the next node in the path when buffers free up.
    Thus in Fig. 4.3 the adaptor has a table that holds the VC state. There are four VCs that have been
set up (1, 3, 5, 7). Of these, only VCs 1, 5, and 7 have some cells to send. Finally, only VCs 1 and
7 have credits to send cells. Thus the next cell to be sent by the adaptor should be from either one of
the eligible VCs: 1 or 7. The selection from the eligible VCs should be done fairly, for example, in
round-robin fashion. If the adaptor chooses to send a cell from VC 7, the adaptor would decrement the
credits of VC 7 to 1. Since there are no more cells to be sent, VC 7 now becomes ineligible. Choosing
the next eligible VC leads to the following problem.

Problem
A naive scheduler may cycle through the VC array looking for a VC that is eligible. If many of the VCs
are ineligible, this can be quite inefficient, for the scheduler may have to step through several VCs that
are ineligible to send one cell from an eligible VC. How can this inefficiency be avoided?
Hint: Consider invoking P12 to add some extra state to speed up the scheduler main loop. What
state can you add to avoid stepping through ineligible VCs? How would you maintain this state
efficiently?




FIGURE 4.3
An ATM VC is eligible to send data if it is active (has some outstanding cells to send in the queue shown below the
VC) and has credits (shown by gray dots above the VC). The problem is to select the next eligible VC in some fair
manner without stepping through VCs that are ineligible.
                                         4.3 Route computation using Dijkstra’s algorithm                  79




FIGURE 4.4
Maintaining a list of eligible VCs to speed up the scheduler main loop.


Solution
Maintain a list (Fig. 4.4) of eligible VCs in addition to the VC table of Fig. 4.3. The only problem is to
efficiently maintain this state. This is the major difficulty in using P12. If the state is too expensive to
maintain, the added state is a liability and not an asset. Recall that a VC is eligible if it has both cells to
send and has credits. Thus a VC is removed from the list after service if VC becomes inactive or has no
more credits; if not, the VC is added to the tail of the list to ensure fairness. A VC is added to the tail
of the list either when a cell arrives to an empty VC cell queue and this (empty) queue also has credits
or when the VC has no credits and receives a credit update.

Exercises

• How can you be sure that a VC is not added multiple times to the eligible list?
• Can this scheme be generalized to allow some VCs to get more opportunities to send than other VCs
  based on a weight assigned by a manager?




4.3 Route computation using Dijkstra’s algorithm
How does a router S decide how to route a packet to a given destination D? Every link in a network is
labeled with a cost, and routers like S often compute the shortest (i.e., lowest-cost) paths to destinations
within a local domain. Assume the cost is a small integer. Recall from Chapter 2 that the most com-
monly used routing protocol within a domain is OSPF (Open Shortest Path First) based on link state
routing.
    In link state routing, every router in a subnet sends a link state packet (LSP) that lists its links to
all of its neighbors. Each LSP is sent to every other router in the subnet. Each router sends its LSP
to other routers using a primitive flooding protocol (Perlman, 1992). Once every router receives an
LSP from every router, then every router has a complete map of the network. Assuming the topology
remains stable, each router can now calculate its shortest path to every other node in the network using
a standard shortest-path algorithm, such as Dijkstra’s algorithm (Cormen et al., 1990).
    In Fig. 4.5 source S wishes to calculate a shortest-path tree to all other nodes (A, B, C, D) in the
network. The network is shown on the left frame in Fig. 4.5 with links numbered with their costs. In
Dijkstra’s algorithm S begins by placing only itself in the shortest-path tree. S also updates the cost
to reach all its direct neighbors (e.g., B, A). At each iteration, Dijkstra’s algorithm adds to the current
80        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.5
In Dijkstra’s algorithm the source S builds a shortest-path tree rooted at S. At each stage, the closest node not in the
tree is added to the tree.



tree the node that is closest to the current tree. The costs of the neighbors of this newly added node are
updated. The process repeats until all nodes in the network belong to the tree.
    For instance, in Fig. 4.5, after adding S, the algorithm picks B and then picks A. At this iteration,
the tree is as shown on the right in Fig. 4.5. The solid lines show the existing tree, and the dotted lines
show the best current connections to nodes that are not already in the tree. Thus since A has a cost of
2 and there is a link of cost 3 from A to C, C is labeled with 5. Similarly, D is labeled with a cost of
3 for the path through B. At the next iteration, the algorithm picks D as the least-cost node not already
in the tree. The cost to C is then updated using the route through D. Finally, C is added to the tree in
the last iteration.
    This textbook solution requires determining the node with the least cost that is not already in the
tree at each iteration. The standard data structure to keep track of the minimum-value element in a
dynamically changing set is a priority queue. This leads to the following problem.

Problem
Dijkstra’s algorithm requires a priority queue at each of N iterations, where N is the number of network
nodes. The best general-purpose priority queues, such as heaps (Cormen et al., 1990), take O(log N )
cost to find the minimum element. This implies a total running time of O(N log N ) time. For a large
network, this can result in slow response to failures and other network topology changes. How can route
computation be speeded up?
Hint: Consider exploiting the fact that the link costs are small integers (P14) by using an array to
represent the current costs of nodes. How can you efficiently, at least in an amortized sense, find
the next minimum-cost node to include in the shortest-path tree?

Solution
The fact that the link costs are small integers can be exploited to construct a priority queue based on
bucket sorting (P14). Assume that the largest link cost is MaxLinkCost. Thus the maximum cost of a
path can be no more than Diam ∗ MaxLinkCost, where Diam is the diameter of the network. Assume
Diam is also a small integer. Thus one could imagine using an array with a location for every possible
cost c in the range 1 . . . Diam ∗ MaxLinkCost. If during the course of Dijkstra’s algorithm the current
                                        4.3 Route computation using Dijkstra’s algorithm               81




FIGURE 4.6
Using a priority queue based on bucket sorting to speed up Dijkstra’s algorithm.


cost of a node X is c, then node X can be placed in a list pointed to by element c of the array (Fig. 4.6).
This leads to the following algorithm.
    Whenever a node X changes its cost from c to c , node X is removed from the list for c and added to
the list for c . But how is the minimum element to be found? This can be done by initializing a pointer
called CurrentMin to 0 (which corresponds to the cost of S). Each time the algorithm wishes to find the
minimum-cost node not in the tree, CurrentMin is incremented by 1 until an array location is reached
that contains a nonempty list. Any node in this list can then be added to the tree. The algorithm costs
O(N + Diam ∗ MaxLinkCost) because the work done in advancing CurrentMin can at most be the size
of the array. This can be significantly better than N log N for large N and small values of Diam and
MaxLinkCost.
    A crucial factor in being able to efficiently use a bucket sort priority queue of the kind described
earlier is that the node costs are always ahead of the value of CurrentMin. This is a monotonicity
condition. If it were not true, the algorithm would start checking for the minimum from 1 at each
iteration, instead of starting from the last value of CurrentMin and never backing up. The monotonicity
condition is fairly obvious for Dijktra’s algorithm because the costs of nodes not already in the tree
have to be larger than the costs of nodes that are already in the tree.
    Fig. 4.6 shows the state of the bucket sort priority queue after A has been added to the tree. This
corresponds to the right frame of Fig. 4.5. At this stage, CurrentMin = 2, which is the cost of A. At the
next iteration, CurrentMin will advance to 3, and D will be added to the tree. This will result in the C’s
cost being reduced to 4. We thus remove C from the list in position 5 and add it to the empty list in
position 4. CurrentMin is then advanced to 4, and C is added to the tree.

Exercises

• The algorithm requires a node to be removed from a list and added to another, earlier list. How can
  this be done efficiently?
• In Fig. 4.6 how can the algorithm know that it can terminate after adding C to the tree instead of
  advancing to the end of the long array?
• In networks that have failures, the concept of diameter is a highly suspect one because the diameter
  could change considerably after a failure. Consider a wheel topology where all N nodes have diam-
82       Chapter 4 Principles in action



  eter 2 through a central spoke node; if the central spoke node fails, the diameter goes up to N/2. In
  actual practice the diameter is often small. Can this cause problems in sizing the array?
• Can you circumvent the problem of the diameter completely by replacing the linear array of Fig. 4.6
  with a circular array of size MaxLinkCost? Explain. The resulting solution is known as Dial’s
  algorithm (Ahuja et al., 1993).



4.4 Ethernet monitor using bridge hardware
Alyssa P. Hacker is working for Acme Networks and knows of the Ethernet bridge invented at Acme.
A bridge (see Chapter 10) is a device that can connect Ethernets together. To forward packets from one
Ethernet to another, the bridge must look up the 48-bit destination address in an Ethernet packet at high
speeds.
    Alyssa decides to convert the bridge into an Ethernet traffic monitor that will passively listen to
an Ethernet and produce statistics about traffic patterns. The marketing person tells her that she needs
to monitor traffic between arbitrary source–destination pairs. Thus for every active source–destination
pair, such as A, B, Alyssa must keep a variable PA,B that measures the number of packets sent from A
to B since the monitor was started. When a packet is sent from A to B, the monitor (which is listening
to all packets sent on the cable) will pick up a copy of the packet. If the source is A and the destination is
B, the monitor should increment PA,B . The problem is to do this in 64 µsec, the minimum interpacket
time on the Ethernet. The bottleneck is the lookup of the state PA,B associated with a pair of 48-bit
addresses A, B.
    Fortunately, the bridge hardware has a spiffy lookup hardware engine that can look up the state
associated with a single 48-bit address in 1.4 µsec. A call to the hardware can be expressed as Lookup(X,
D), where X is the 48-bit key and D is the database to be searched. The call returns the state associated
with X in 1.4 µsec for databases of less than 64,000 keys. What Alyssa must solve is the following
problem.

Problem
The monitor needs to update state for AB when a packet from A to B arrives. The monitor has a lookup
engine that can look up only single addresses and not address pairs. How can Alyssa use the existing
engine to look up address pairs? The problem is illustrated in Fig. 4.7.

Hint: The problem requires using P4c to exploit the existing bridge hardware. Since 1.4 µsec is
much smaller than 64 µsec, the design can afford to use more than one hardware lookup. How can
a 96-bit lookup be reduced to a 48-bit lookup using three lookups?
    A naive solution is to use two lookups to convert source A and destination B into smaller
(<24-bit) indices IA and IB . The indices IA and IB can then be used to look up a two-dimensional
array that stores the state for AB. This requires only two hardware lookups plus one more mem-
ory access, but it can require large amounts of memory. If there are 1000 possible sources and
1000 possible destinations, the array must contain a million entries. In practice, there may be
only 20,000 active source–destination pairs. How could you make the required amount of memory
proportional to the number of actual source–destination pairs?
                                                4.4 Ethernet monitor using bridge hardware                        83




FIGURE 4.7
Adapting an engine that does destination lookups to doing source-destination lookups.




FIGURE 4.8
Converting a 96-bit lookup into a 48-bit lookup by first converting each 48-bit address into a 24-bit index and
concatenating the indices.




Solution
As before, first use one lookup each to convert source A and destination B into smaller (<24-bit)
indices IA and IB . Then use a third lookup to map from IA IB to AB state. The solution is illustrated in
Fig. 4.8. The third lookup effectively compresses the two-dimensional array of the naive solution. This
solution is due to Mark Kempf and Mike Soha.

Exercises

• Can this problem be solved using only two bridge hardware lookups without requiring extra mem-
  ory?
• The set of active source–destination pairs may change with time because some pairs of addresses
  stop communicating for long periods. How can this be handled without keeping the state for every
  possible address pair that has communicated since the monitor was powered on?
