                                                                     2.3 Network device architectures                         37



    Algorithms for prefix lookups are described in Chapter 11. Many routers today also offer a more
complex lookup called packet classification (Chapter 12), where the lookup takes as input the destina-
tion address as well as source address and TCP ports.

Switching
After address lookup in the example of Fig. 2.10, the processor instructs an internal switching system
to transfer the packet from link i to output link 6. In older processors, the switch was a simple bus,
such as shown in Fig. 2.8. This proved to be a major bottleneck because, if the switch has N input links
running at B bits per second, the bus would have to have a bandwidth of B · N . Unfortunately, as N
increases, electrical effects (such as the capacitive load of a bus) predominate, limiting the bus speed.
    Thus the fastest routers today internally use a parallel switch of the sort shown in Fig. 2.9. The
throughput of the switch is increased by using N parallel buses, one for each input and one for each
output. An input and an output are connected by turning on transistors connecting the corresponding
input bus and output bus. While it is easy to build the data path, it is harder to schedule the switch, be-
cause multiple inputs may wish to send to the same output link at the same time. The switch-scheduling
problem boils down to matching available inputs and outputs every packet arrival time. Algorithms for
this purpose are described in Chapter 13.

Queuing
Once the packet in Fig. 2.10 has been looked up and switched to output link 6, output link 6 may be
congested, and thus the packet may have to be placed in a queue for output link 6. Many older routers
simply place the packet in a first-in-first-out (FIFO) transmission queue. However, some routers employ
more sophisticated output scheduling to provide fair bandwidth allocation and delay guarantees. Output
scheduling is described in Chapter 14.
    Besides the major tasks of lookups, switching, and queuing, there are a number of other tasks that
are less time-critical.

Header validation and checksums
The version number of a packet is checked, and the header-length field is checked for options. Options
are additional processing directives that are rarely used; such packets are often shunted to a separate
route processor. The header also has a simple checksum that must be verified. Finally, a time-to-live
(TTL) field must be decremented and the header checksum recalculated. Chapter 9 shows how to
incrementally update the checksum. Header validation and checksum computation are often done in
hardware.

Route processing
Section A.1.2 describes briefly how routers build forwarding tables using routing protocols. Routers
within domains implement RIP and OSPF, while routers that link domains also must implement BGP.11


11 It is possible to buy versions of these protocols, but the software must be customized for each new hardware platform. A more
insidious problem, especially with BGP and OSPF, is that many of the first implementations of these protocols vary in subtle
ways from the actual specifications. Thus a new implementation that meets the specification may not interoperate with existing
routers. Thus ISPs are reluctant to buy new routers unless they can trust the “quality” of the BGP code, in terms of its ability to
interoperate with existing routers.
38         Chapter 2 Network implementation models



These protocols are implemented in one or more route processors. For example, when a LSP is sent
to the router in Fig. 2.10, lookup will recognize that this is a packet destined for the router itself and
will cause the packet to be switched to the route processor. The route processor maintains the link-state
database and computes shortest paths; after computation, the route processor loads the new forwarding
databases in each of the forwarding processors through either the switch or a separate out-of-band path.
    In the early days, Cisco won its spurs by processing not just Internet packets but also other routing
protocols, such as DECNET, SNA, and AppleTalk. The need for such multiprotocol processing is less
clear now. A much more important trend is multi-protocol-label switching (MPLS), which appears to
be de rigeur for core routers. In MPLS, the IP header is augmented with a header containing simple
integer indices that can be looked up directly without a prefix lookup; Chapter 11 provides more details
about MPLS.

Protocol processing
All routers today have to implement the simple network management protocol (SNMP) and provide a
set of counters that can be inspected remotely. To allow remote communication with the router, most
routers also implement TCP and UDP. In addition, routers have to implement the Internet control mes-
sage protocol (ICMP), which is basically a protocol for sending error messages, such as “time-to-live
exceeded.”

Fragmentation, redirects, and ARPs
While it is clear that route and protocol processing is best relegated to a route processor on a so-called
“slow path,” there are a few router functions that are more ambiguous. For example, if a packet of 3000
bytes is to be sent over a link with a maximum packet size (MTU) of 1500 bytes, the packet has to
be fragmented into two pieces.12 While the prevailing trend is for sources, instead of routers, to do
fragmentation, some routers do fragmentation in the fast path. Another such function is the sending of
Redirects. If an endnode sends a message to the wrong router, the router is supposed to send a Redirect
back to the endnode. A third such function is the sending of address resolution protocol (ARP) requests,
whose operation is explored in the exercises.
    Finally, routers today have a number of other tasks they may be called on to perform. Many routers
within enterprises do content-based handling of packets, where the packet processing depends on
strings found in the packet data. For example, a router that fronts a Web farm of many servers may
wish to forward packets with the same Web URL to the same Web server. There are also the issues of
accounting and traffic measurement. Some of these new services are described in Chapter 16.
Example 7. Network Processors: Network processors are general-purpose programmable processors
optimized for network traffic. Their proponents say that they are needed because the unpredictable
nature of router tasks (such as content-based delivery) makes committing router forwarding to silicon a
risky proposition. For example, the Intel IXP1200 network processor evaluated in Spalink et al. (2000)
internally contains six processors, each running at 177 MHz with a 5.6-nsec clock cycle. Each processor
receives packets from an input queue; packets are stored in a large DRAM; after the processor has
looked up the packet destination, the packet is placed on the output queue with a tag describing the
output link it should be forwarded to.


12 Strictly speaking, since each fragment adds headers, there will be three pieces.
                                                                    2.4 Operating systems              39



    The biggest problem is that the processors are responsible for moving packets in and out of DRAM.
In the IXP1200, moving 32 bytes from the queue to the DRAM takes 45 clock cycles, and moving from
the DRAM to the queue takes 55 cycles. Since a minimum-size packet is at least 40 bytes, this requires
a total of 200 cycles = 1.12 usec, which translates to a forwarding rate of only around 900 K pack-
ets/second. The IXP1200 gets around this limit by using six parallel processors and an old architectural
idea called multithreading. The main idea is that each processor works on multiple packets, each packet
being a thread; when the processing for one packet stalls because of a memory reference, processing
for the next thread is resumed. Using fast context switching between threads, and four contexts per
processor, the IXP1200 can theoretically obtain 6 * 4 * 900 K = 21.6 M packets/second.
    Network processors also offer special-purpose instructions for address lookup and other common
forwarding functions. Some network processors also streamline the movement of data packets by hav-
ing hardware engines that present only the header of each data packet to the processor. The remainder
of the data packet flows directly to the output queue. The processor(s) read the header, do the lookup,
and write the updated header to the output queue. The hardware magically glues together the updated
header with the original packet and keeps all packets in order. While this approach avoids the move-
ment of the remainder of the packet through the processor, it does nothing for the case of minimum-size
packets.

                            Case Study 2: Buffering and optical switching
      As fiber-optic links scale to higher speeds, electronics implementing combinational logic and
  memories in core routers becomes a bottleneck. Currently, packets arrive over fiber-optic links
  with each bit encoded as a light pulse. Optics at the receiver convert light to electrical pulses; the
  packet is then presented to forwarding logic implemented electronically. The packet is then queued
  to an outbound link for transmission, upon which the transmitting link optics convert electrical
  bits back to light. The electronic bottleneck can be circumvented by creating an all-optical router
  without any electro-optical conversions.
      Unfortunately, doing IP lookups optically, and especially building dense optical packet mem-
  ories, seems hard today. But switching light between several endpoints is feasible. Thus the
  numerous start-ups in the buzzing optical space tend to build optical circuit switches that use
  electronics to set up the circuit switch. A circuit switch connects input X to output Y for a large
  duration, as opposed to the duration of a single packet as in a packet switch. Such circuit switches
  have found use as a flexible “core” of an ISP’s network to connect conventional routers. If traf-
  fic between, say, routers R1 and R2 increases, an ISP operator can (at a large time scale of, say,
  minutes) change the circuit switches to increase the bandwidth of the R1-to-R2 path. However,
  the wastefulness of reserving switch paths for small flow durations makes it likely that packet-
  switched routers will continue to be popular in the near future.




2.4 Operating systems
An operating system is a software that sits above hardware in order to make life easier for application
programmers. For most Internet routers, time-critical packet forwarding runs directly on the hardware
(Fig. 2.10) and is not mediated by an operating system. Less time-critical code runs on a router oper-
40        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.11
The programmer sees the illusion of an uninterrupted timeline shown above, while the real processor timeline may
switch back and forth between several processes.


ating system that is stripped down, such as Cisco’s IOS. However, to improve end-to-end performance
for, say, Web browsing, an implementor needs to understand the costs and benefits of operating systems.
    Abstractions are idealizations or illusions we invent to deal with the perversity and irregularity of
the real world. To finesse the difficulties of programming on a bare machine, operating systems offer
abstractions to application programmers. Three central difficulties of dealing with raw hardware are
dealing with interruptions, managing memory, and controlling I/O devices. To deal with these diffi-
culties, operating systems offer the abstractions of uninterrupted computation, infinite memory, and
simple I/O.
    A good abstraction increases programmer productivity but has two costs. First, the mechanism im-
plementing the abstraction has a price. For example, scheduling processes can cause overhead for a Web
server. A second, less obvious cost is that the abstraction can hide power, preventing the programmer
from making optimal use of resources. For example, operating system memory management may pre-
vent the programmer of an Internet lookup algorithm from keeping the lookup data structure in memory
in order to maximize performance. We now provide a model of the costs and underlying mechanisms of
the process (Section 2.4.1), virtual memory (Section 2.4.2), and I/O (Section 2.4.3) abstractions. More
details can be found in Tanenbaum (1992).


2.4.1 Uninterrupted computation via processes
A program may not run very long on the processor before being interrupted by the network adaptor.
If application programmers had to deal with interrupts, a working 100-line program would be a mir-
acle. Thus operating systems provide programmers with the abstraction of uninterrupted, sequential
computation under the name of a process.
    The process abstraction is realized by three mechanisms: context switching, scheduling, and protec-
tion, the first two of which are depicted in Fig. 2.11. In Fig. 2.11, Process P1 has the illusion that it runs
on the processor by itself. In reality, as shown on the timeline below, Process P1 may be interrupted by a
timer interrupt, which causes the OS scheduler program to run on the processor. Displacing P1 requires
the operating system to save the state of P1 in memory. The scheduler may run briefly and decide to give
Process P2 a turn. Restoring P2 to run on the processor requires restoring the state of P2 from memory.
Thus the actual time line of a processor may involve frequent context switches between processes, as
orchestrated by the scheduler. Finally, protection ensures that incorrect or malicious behavior of one
process cannot affect other processes.
    As agents of computation, “processes” come in three flavors—interrupt handlers, threads, and user
processes—ranked in order of increasing generality and cost. Interrupt handlers are small pieces of
                                                                           2.4 Operating systems                  41




FIGURE 2.12
The processing of a received Internet packet in BSD is divided between the network adaptor, the kernel, and the
destined process.


computation used to service urgent requests, such as the arrival of a message to the network adaptor;
interrupt handlers use only a small amount of state, typically a few registers. User processes use the
complete state of the machine, such as memory as well as registers; thus, it is expensive to switch
between user processes as directed by the scheduler. Within the context of a single process, threads offer
a cheaper alternative to processes. A thread is a lightweight process that requires less state, because
threads within the same process share the same memory (i.e., same variables). Thus context switching
between two threads in the same process is cheaper than switching processes, because memory does
not have to be remapped. The following example shows the relevance of these concepts to endnode
networking.
Example 8. Receiver Livelock in BSD Unix: In BSD UNIX, as shown in Fig. 2.12, the arrival of a
packet generates an interrupt. The interrupt is a hardware signal that causes the processor to save the
state of the currently running process, say, a Java program. The processor then jumps to the interrupt
handler code, bypassing the scheduler for speed. The interrupt handler copies the packet to a kernel
queue of IP packets waiting to be consumed, makes a request for an operating system thread (called a
software interrupt), and exits. Assuming no further interrupts, the interrupt exit passes control to the
scheduler, which is likely to cede the processor to the software interrupt, which has higher priority than
user processes.
    The kernel thread does TCP and IP processing and queues the packet to the appropriate application
queue, called a socket queue (Fig. 2.12). Assume that the application is a browser such as Netscape.
Netscape runs as a process that may have been asleep waiting for data and is now considered for being
run on the processor by the scheduler. After the software interrupt exits and control passes back to the
scheduler, the scheduler may decide to run Netscape in place of the original Java program.
42        Chapter 2 Network implementation models



    Under high network load, the computer can enter what is called receiver livelock (Mogul and Ra-
makrishnan, 1997), in which the computer spends all its time processing incoming packets, only to
discard them later because the applications never run. In our example, if there is a series of back-to-
back packet arrivals, only the highest-priority interrupt handler will run, possibly leaving no time for
the software interrupt and certainly leaving none for the browser process. Thus either the IP or socket
queues will fill up, causing packets to be dropped after resources have been invested in their processing.
Methods to mitigate this effect are described in Chapter 6.
    Notice also that the latency and throughput of network code in an endnode depend on “process”
activation times. For example, current figures for Pentium IV machines show around 2 µsec of interrupt
latency for a null interrupt call, around 10 µsec for a Process Context switch on a Linux machine
with two processes, and much more time for Windows and Solaris on the same machine. These times
may seem small, but recall that 30 minimum-size (40-byte) packets can arrive in 10 µsec on a Gigabit
Ethernet link.



2.4.2 Infinite memory via virtual memory
In virtual memory (Fig. 2.13), the programmer works with an abstraction of memory that is a linear
array into which a compiler assigns variable locations. Variable X could be stored in location 1010 in
this imaginary (or virtual) array. The virtual memory abstraction is implemented using the twin mech-




FIGURE 2.13
The programmer sees the illusion of contiguous virtual memory, which is, in reality, mapped to a collection of main
memory and disk memory pages via page tables.
                                                                    2.4 Operating systems             43



anisms of page table mapping and demand paging. Both these mechanisms are crucial to understand in
order to optimize data transfer costs in an endnode.
    Any virtual address must be mapped to a physical memory address. The easiest mapping is to use
an offset into physical memory. For example, a virtual array of 15,000 locations could be mapped into
physical memory from, say, 12,000 to 27,000. This has two disadvantages. First, when the program
runs, a block of 15,000 contiguous locations has to be found. Second, the programmer is limited to
using a total memory equal to the size of physical memory.
    Both problems can be avoided by a mapping based on table lookup. Since it takes too much memory
to implement a mapping from any virtual location to any physical location, a more restricted mapping
based on pages is used. Thus for any virtual address, let us say that the high-order bits (e.g., 20 bits)
form the page number and that the low-order bits (e.g., 12 bits) form the location within a page. All
locations within a virtual page are mapped to the same relative location, but individual virtual pages
can be mapped to arbitrary locations. Main memory is also divided into physical pages, such that every
group of 212 memory words is a physical page.
    To map a virtual into a physical address, the corresponding virtual page (i.e., high-order 20 bits) is
mapped to a physical page number while retaining the same location within the page. The mapping is
done by looking up a page table indexed by the virtual page number. A virtual page can be located on
any physical memory page. More generally, some pages (e.g., Virtual Page 2 in Fig. 2.13) may not be
memory resident and can be marked as being on disk. When such a page is accessed, the hardware will
generate an exception and cause the operating system to read the page from the disk page into a main
memory page. This second mechanism is called demand paging.
    Together, page mapping and demand paging solve the two problems of storage allocation and
bounded memory allocations. Instead of solving the harder variable size storage allocation problem,
the OS needs only to keep a list of fixed size free pages and to assign some free pages to a new pro-
gram. Also, the programmer can work with an abstraction of memory whose size is bounded only by
the size of the disk and the number of instruction address bits.
    The extra mapping can slow down each instruction considerably. A Read to virtual location X may
require two main memory accesses: a page table access to translate X to physical address P , followed
by a Read to address P . Modern processors get around this overhead by caching the most recently used
mappings between virtual and physical addresses in a translation look-aside buffer (TLB), which is
a processor-resident cache. The actual translation is done by a piece of hardware called the memory
management unit (MMU), as shown in Fig. 2.8.
    The page table mapping also provides a mechanism for protection between processes. When a
process makes a Read to virtual location X, unless there is a corresponding entry in the page table, the
hardware will generate a page fault exception. By ensuring that only the operating system can change
page table entries, the operating system can ensure that one process cannot read from or write to the
memory of another process in an unauthorized fashion.
    While router forwarding works directly on physical memory, all endnode and server networking
code works on virtual memory. While virtual memory is a potential cost (e.g., for TLB misses), it
also reflects a possible opportunity. For example, it offers the potential for packet copying between the
operating system and the application (see Example 8) to be done more efficiently by manipulating page
tables. This idea is explored further in Chapter 5.
44        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.14
The programmer sees devices as disparate as a disk and a network adaptor as pieces of memory that can be read and
written using system calls, but in reality, the kernel manages a host of device-specific details.



2.4.3 Simple I/O via system calls
Having an application programmer be aware of the variety and complexity of each I/O device would
be intolerable. Thus operating systems provide the programmer with the abstraction of the devices as a
piece of memory (Fig. 2.14) that can be read and written.
     The code that maps from a simple I/O interface call to the actual physical Read (with all parameters
filled in) to the device is called a device driver. If abstraction were the only concern, the device driver
code could be installed in a library of commonly available code that can be “checked out” by each
application. However, since devices such as disks must be shared by all applications, if applications
directly control the disk, an erroneous process could crash the disk. Instead, secure operating system
design requires that only the buggy application fail.
     Thus it makes sense for the I/O calls to be handled by device drivers that are in a secure portion of
the operating system that cannot be affected by buggy processes. This secure portion, called the kernel,
provides a core of essential services, including I/O and page table updates, that applications cannot be
trusted to perform directly.
     Thus when a browser such as Netscape wants to make a disk access to read a Web page, it must make
a so-called system call across the application–kernel boundary. System calls are a protected form of a
function call. The hardware instruction is said to “trap” to a more privileged level (kernel mode), which
allows access to operating system internals. When the function call returns after the I/O completes, the
application code runs at normal privilege levels. A system call is more expensive than a function call
because of the hardware privilege escalation and the extra sanitizing checks for incorrect parameter
values. A simple system call may take a few microseconds on modern machines.
     The relevance to networking is that when a browser wishes to send a message over the network (e.g.,
Process 2 in Fig. 2.14), it must do a system call to activate TCP processing. A few microseconds for
a system call may seem small, but it is really very high overhead on a fast Pentium. Can applications
speed up networking by bypassing the system call? If so, does OS protection get tossed out of the
window? Answers to these tantalizing questions are postponed to Chapter 6.
                                                                                   2.6 Exercises               45




2.5 Summary
This chapter is best sampled based on the reader’s needs. Structurally, the chapter works its way through
four abstraction levels that affect performance: hardware, architecture, operating systems, and proto-
cols. Viewing across abstraction levels is helpful because packet-processing speeds can be limited by
transistor paths implementing packet processing, by architectural limits such as bus speeds, by OS ab-
straction overheads such as system calls, and finally, even by protocol mechanisms. Several examples,
which look ahead to the rest of the book, were described to show that performance can be improved by
understanding each abstraction level.
    Designers that consider all four abstraction levels for each problem will soon be lost in detail.
However, there are a few important performance issues and major architectural decisions for which
simultaneous understanding of all abstraction levels is essential. For example, the simple models given
in this chapter can allow circuit designers, logic designers, architects, microcoders, and software pro-
tocol implementors to work together to craft the architecture of a world-class router. They can also
allow operating system designers, algorithm experts, and application writers to work together to design
a world-class Web server. As link speeds cross 40 Gbps, such interdisciplinary teams will become even
more important. This need is alluded to by Raymond Kurzweil in a different context (Kurzweil, 2001):
   There’s another aspect of creativity. We’ve been talking about great individual contributors, but when
   you’re creating technology it’s necessarily a group process, because technology today is so complex
   that it has to be interdisciplinary . . . And they’re all essentially speaking their own languages, even
   about the same concepts. So we will spend months establishing our common language . . . I have a
   technique to get people to think outside the box: I’ll give a signal-processing problem to the linguists,
   and vice versa, and let them apply the disciplines in which they’ve grown up to a completely different
   problem. The result is often an approach that the experts in the original field would never have thought
   of. Group process gives creativity a new dimension.
   With fields like hardware implementation and protocol design replacing signal processing and lin-
guistics, Kurzweil’s manifesto reflects the goal of this chapter.



2.6 Exercises
1. TCP Protocols and Denial-of-Service Attacks: A common exploit for a hacker is to attempt to
   bring down a popular service, such as Yahoo, by doing a denial-of-service (DOS) attack. A simple
   DOS attack that can be understood using the simple TCP model of Fig. A.1 is TCP Syn-Flooding.
   In this attack, the hacker sends a number of SYN packets to the chosen destination D (e.g., Yahoo)
   using randomly chosen source addresses. D sends back a SYN-ACK to the supposed source S
   and waits for a response. If S is not an active IP address, then there will be no response from S.
   Unfortunately, state for S is kept in a pending connection queue at D until D finally times out S. By
   periodically sending bogus connection attempts pretending to be from different sources, the attacker
   can ensure that the finite pending connection queue is always full. Thereafter, legitimate connection
   requests to D will be denied.
   • Assume there is a monitor that is watching all traffic. What algorithm can be used to detect
     denial-of-service attacks? Try to make your algorithm as fast and memory-efficient as possible
46        Chapter 2 Network implementation models



     so that it can potentially be used in real-time, even in a router. This is a hard problem, but even
     starting to think about the problem is instructive.
   • Suppose the monitor realizes a TCP flood attack is underway. Why might it be hard to distinguish
     between legitimate traffic and flood traffic?
2. Digital Design: Multiplexers and barrel shifters are very useful in networking hardware, so working
   on this problem can help even a software person to build up hardware intuition.
   • First, design a 2-input multiplexer from basic gates (AND, OR, NOT).
   • Next, generalize the idea shown in the chapter to design an N -input multiplexer from N/2 input
     multiplexers. Use this to describe a design that takes log N gate delays and O(N ) transistors.
   • Show how to design a barrel shifter using a reduction to multiplexers (i.e., use as many muxes as
     you need in your solution). Based on your earlier solutions, what are the gate and time complex-
     ities of your solution?
   • Try to design a barrel shifter directly at the transistor level. What are its time and transistor
     complexities? You can do better using direct design than the simple reduction earlier.
3. Thermometer Encoding: Spell out the digital logic of the following 4-bit-input digital-to-analog
   converter (a.k.a. thermometer encoding), a wider slight variant of which is used in Fig. 2.4 for
   generating an N -bit mask. The inputs are i1 (the least significant bit), i2 , i3 , and i4 . The outputs are
   j1 , j2 , · · · , j15 . If the binary number (i4 i3 i2 i1 )2 has value k, then j1 = j2 = · · · = jk = 1 and the rest
   is 0. You need to spell out the formula for each jl (1 ≤ l ≤ 15) as a logic function of the inputs.
   Please use notations ∨ (for OR), ∧ (for AND), and ¬ (for NOT).
4. Memory Design: For the design of the pipelined flow ID lookup scheme described earlier, draw the
   timing diagrams for the pipelined lookups. Use the numbers described in the chapter, and clearly
   sketch a sample binary tree with 15 leaves and show how it can be looked up after four lookups on
   four different banks. Assume a binary tree, not a ternary tree. Also, calculate the number of keys that
   can be supported using 16 banks of RAMBUS if the first k levels of the tree are cached in on-chip
   SRAM.
5. Memories and Pipelining Trees: This problem studies how to pipeline a heap. A heap is important
   for applications like QoS, where a router wishes to transmit the packet with the earliest timestamp
   first. Thus it makes sense to have a heap ordered on timestamps. To make it efficient, the heap needs
   to be pipelined in the same fashion as the binary search tree example in the chapter, though doing so
   for a heap is somewhat harder. Fig. 2.15 shows an example of a P-heap capable of storing 15 keys.
   A P-heap (Bhagwan and Lin, 2000) is a full binary tree, such as a standard heap, except that nodes
   anywhere in the heap can be empty as long as all children of the node are also empty (e.g., nodes 6,
   12, 13).
       For the following explanations consult Fig. 2.15 and Fig. 2.16. Consider adding key 9 to the heap.
   Assume every node N has a count of the number of empty nodes in the subtree rooted at N . Since
   9 is less than the root value of 16, 9 must move below. Since both the left and right children have
   empty nodes in their subtrees, we arbitrarily choose to add 9 to the left subtree (node 2). The index,
   value, and position values shown on the left of each tree are registers used to show the state of the
   current operation. Thus in Fig. 2.15, part (b), when 9 is added to the left subtree, the index represents
   the depth of the subtree (depth 2) and the position is the number of the node (i.e., node 2) that the
   value 9 is being added to.
                                                                                       2.6 Exercises            47




FIGURE 2.15
An enqueue example in five snapshots to be read from left to right and then top-down. In each snapshot, the index
represents the depth of the subtree, and the position is the number of the node that the value is being added to.



      Next, since 9 is less than 14 and since only the right child has space in its subtree, 9 is added to
   the subtree rooted at node 5. This time 9 is greater than 7, so 7 is replaced with 9 (in node 5) and 7 is
   pushed down to the empty node, 10. Thus in Fig. 2.15, part (d), the index value is 4 (i.e., operation is
   at depth 4) and the position is 10. Although in Fig. 2.15 only one of the registers at any index/depth
   has nonempty information, keeping separate registers for each index will allow pipelining.
      Consider next what is involved in removing the largest element (dequeue). Remove 16 and try to
   push down the hole created until an empty subtree is created. Thus in Step 3, the hole is moved to
   node 2 (because its value, 14, is larger than its sibling, with value 10), then to node 4, and finally to
48      Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.16
Dequeue example.


   node 9. Each time a hole is moved down, the corresponding nonempty value from below replaces
   the old hole.
   • In order to make the enqueue operation work correctly, the count of empty subtree nodes must be
     maintained. Explain briefly how the count should be maintained for each enqueue and dequeue
     operation (the structure will be pipelined in a moment, so make sure the count values respect this
     goal).
   • A logical thing to do is to pipeline by level, as we did for the binary tree in the chapter. However,
     here we have a problem. At each level (say, inserting 9 at the root), the operation has to consult
     the two children at the next level as well. Thus when the first operation moves down to level 2,
                                                                               2.6 Exercises          49



       one cannot bring in a second operation to level 1 or there will be memory contention. Clearly,
       waiting till one operation finishes completely will work, but this reduces to sequential processing
       of operations. What is the fastest rate you can pipeline the heap?
   •   Consider the operations “Enqueue 9; Enqueue 4.5; Dequeue” pipelined as you have answered
       earlier. Show six consecutive snapshots of the tree supporting these three operations.
   •   Assume that each level memory is an on-chip SRAM that takes 5 nsec for a memory access.
       Assume that you can read and write the value and count fields together in one access. Remember
       that some of the memories can be queried in parallel. What is the steady-state throughput of the
       heap, in operations per second?
   •   Could one improve the number of memory references by using a wider memory access and laying
       out the tree appropriately?
   •   Before this design, previous designs used a memory element for each heap element as well as
       logic for each element. Thus the amount of logic required scaled directly with heap size, which
       scales poorly in terms of density and power. In this design, the memory scales with the number
       of heap elements and thus scales with SRAM densities and power, but the logic required scales
       much better. Explain.
6. Architecture, Caches, and Fast Hash Functions: The L1 cache in a CPU provides essentially
   a fast hash function that maps from a physical memory address to its contents via the L1 cache.
   Suppose that one wants to teach an old dog (the L1 cache) a new trick (to do IP lookups) using a
   method suggested in Chiueh and Pradhan (1999). The goal is to use the L1 cache as a hash table to
   map 32-bit IP addresses to 7-bit port numbers. Assume a 16-KB L1 cache, of which the first 4 KB
   are reserved for the hash table, and a 32-byte cache block size. Assume a byte-addressable machine,
   a 32-bit virtual address, and a page size of 4 KB. Thus there are 512 32-byte blocks in the cache.
   Assume the L1 cache is directly indexed (called direct mapped). Thus bits 5 through 13 of a virtual
   address are used to index into one of 512 blocks, with bits 0 through 4 identifying the byte within
   each block.
   • Given pages of size 4 KB and that the machine is byte addressable, how many bits in a virtual
     address identify the virtual page? How many bits of the virtual page number intersect with bits 5
     through 13 used to index into the L1 cache?
   • The only way to ensure that the hash table is not thrown out of the L1 cache when some other
     virtual pages arrive is to mark any pages that could map into the same portion of the L1 cache
     as uncacheable at start-up (this can be done). Based on your previous answer and the fact that
     the hash table uses the first 4 KB of L1 cache, precisely identify which pages must be marked as
     uncacheable.
   • To do a lookup of a 32-bit IP address, first convert the address to a virtual address by setting to
     0 all bits except bits 5 through 11 (bits 12 and 13 are zero because only the top quarter of the
     L1 cache is being used). Assume this is translated to the exact same physical address. When a
     Read is done to this address, the L1 cache hardware will return the contents of the first 32-bit
     word of the corresponding cache block. Each 32-bit word will contain a 25-bit tag and a 7-bit
     port number. Next, compare all bits in the IP address, other than bits 5 through 11, with the tag,
     and keep doing so for each 32-bit entry in the block. How many L1 cache accesses are required
     in the worst case for a hash lookup? Why might this be faster than a standard hash lookup in
     software?
50      Chapter 2 Network implementation models



7. Operating Systems and Lazy Receiver Processing: Example 8 described how BSD protocol pro-
   cessing can lead to receiver livelock. Lazy receiver processing (Druschel and Banga, 1996) combats
   this problem via two mechanisms.
   • The first mechanism is to replace the single shared IP processing queue by a separate queue per
     destination socket. Why does this help? Why might this not be easy to implement?
   • The second mechanism is to implement the protocol processing at the priority of the receiving
     process and as part of the context of the received process (and not a separate software interrupt).
     Why does this help? Why might this not be easy to implement?
                                                                                                          CHAPTER


Fifteen implementation principles
                                                                                                              3
                        Instead of computing, I had to think about the problem, a formula for success that I recommend
                                                                                                                 highly.
                                                                                                     —Ivan Sutherland


After understanding how queens and knights move in a game of chess, it helps to understand basic
strategies, such as castling and the promotion of pawns in the endgame. Similarly, having studied some
of the rules of the protocol implementation game in the last chapter, you will be presented in this chapter
with implementation strategies in the form of 15 principles. The principles are abstracted from protocol
implementations that have worked well. Many good implementors unconsciously use such principles.
The point, however, is to articulate such principles so that they can be deliberately applied to craft
efficient implementations.
    This chapter is organized as follows. Section 3.1 motivates the use of the principles using a ternary
CAM problem. Section 3.2 clarifies the distinction between algorithms and algorithmics using a net-
work security forensics problem. Section 3.3 introduces 15 implementation principles; Section 3.4
explains the differences between implementation and design principles. Finally, Section 3.5 describes
some cautionary questions that should be asked before applying the principles.

    Quick reference guide
    The reader pressed for time should consult the summaries of the 15 principles found in Figs. 3.1–3.3. Two networking
    applications of these principles can be found in a ternary CAM update problem (Section 3.1) and a network security
    forensics problem (Section 3.2).




3.1 Motivating the use of principles—updating ternary
    content-addressable memories
Call a string ternary if it contains characters that are either 0, 1, or *, where * denotes a wildcard that
can match both a 0 and a 1. Examples of ternary strings of length 3 include S1 = 01* and S2 = *1*;
the actual binary string 011 matches both S1 and S2, while 111 matches only S2. A ternary content-
addressable memory (CAM) is a memory containing ternary strings of a specified length together with
associated information; when presented with an input string, the CAM will search all its memory loca-
tions in parallel to output (in one cycle) the lowest memory location whose ternary string matches the
specified input key.
Network Algorithmics. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-809927-8.00008-7
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                                       51
