22       Chapter 2 Network implementation models



  because a missing TCP segment (containing the SCSI message length) makes it impossible to find
  later message boundaries. An alternate proposal suggests having the iSCSI layer insert headers at
  periodic intervals in the TCP byte stream, but the jury is still out.




2.2 Hardware
As links approach 40-gigabit/sec OC-768 speeds, a 40-byte packet must be forwarded in 8 nsec. At such
speeds, packet forwarding is typically directly implemented in hardware instead of on a programmable
processor. You cannot participate in the design process of such hardware-intensive designs without
understanding the tools and constraints of hardware designers. And yet, a few simple models can allow
you to understand and even play with hardware designs. Even if you have no familiarity with and
have a positive distaste for hardware, you are invited to take a quick tour of hardware design, full of
networking examples to keep you awake.
   Internet lookups are often implemented using combinational logic, Internet packets are stored in
router memories, and an Internet router is put together with components such as switches and lookup
chips. Thus our tour begins with logic implementation, continues with memory internals, and ends
with component-based design. For more details, we refer the reader to the classic VLSI text (Mead
and Conway, 1980), which still wears well despite its age, and the classic computer architecture text
(Hennessey and Patterson, 1996).


2.2.1 Combinatorial logic
Section A.2.1 in Appendix describes very simple models of basic hardware gates, such as NOT, NAND,
and NOR, that can be understood by even a software designer who is willing to read a few pages.
However, even knowing how basic gates are implemented is not required to have some insight into
hardware design.
    The first key to understanding logic design is the following observation. Given NOT, NAND, and
NOR gates, Boolean algebra shows that any Boolean function f (I1 , . . . , In ) of n inputs can be imple-
mented. Each bit of a multibit output can be considered a function of the input bits. Logic minimization
is often used to eliminate redundant gates and sometimes to increase speed. For example, if + denotes
OR and · denotes AND, then the function O = I1 · I2 + I1 · I2 can be simplified to O = I1 .

Example 1. Quality of Service and Priority Encoders: Suppose we have a network router that maintains
n output packet queues for a link, where queue i has higher priority than queue j if i < j . This problem
comes under the category of providing quality of service (QoS), which is covered in Chapter 14. The
transmit scheduler in the router must pick a packet from the first nonempty packet queue in priority
order. Assume the scheduler maintains an N -bit vector (bitmap) I such that I [ j ] = 1 if and only if
queue j is nonempty. Then the scheduler can find the highest-priority nonempty queue by finding the
smallest position in I in which a bit is set. Hardware designers know this function intimately as a
priority encoder. However, even a software designer should realize that this function is feasible for
hardware implementation for reasonable n. This function is examined more closely in Example 2.
                                                                                                   2.2 Hardware     23



2.2.2 Timing and power
To forward a 40-byte packet at OC-768 speeds, any networking function on the packet must complete
in 8 nsec. Thus the maximum signal transmission delay from inputs to outputs on any logic path must
not exceed 8 nsec.2 To ensure this constraint, a model of signal transmission delay in a transistor is
needed.
    Roughly speaking, each logic gate, such as a NAND or NOT gate, can be thought of as a set of
capacitors and resistors that must be charged (when input values change) in order to compute output
values. Worse, charging one input gate can cause the outputs of later gates to charge further inputs,
and so on. Thus for a combinatorial function, the delay to compute the function is the sum of the
charging and discharging delays over the worst-case path of transistors. Such path delays must fit within
a minimum packet arrival time. Besides the time to charge capacitors, another source of delay is wire
delay. More details can be found in Section A.2.2.
    It also takes energy to charge capacitors, where the energy per unit time (power) scales with the
square of the voltage, the capacitance, and the clock frequency at which inputs can change; P = CV 2 f .
While new processes shrink voltage levels and capacitance, higher-speed circuits must increase clock
frequency. Similarly, parallelism implies more capacitors being charged at a time. Thus many high-
speed chips dissipate a lot of heat, requiring nontrivial cooling techniques such as heat sinks. ISPs and
colocation facilities are large consumers of power. While our level of abstraction precludes understand-
ing power trade-offs, it is good to be aware that chips and routers are sometimes power limited. Some
practical limits today are 30 watts per square centimeter on a single die and 10,000 watts per square
foot in a data center.
Example 2. Priority Encoder Design: Consider the problem of estimating timing for the priority en-
coder of Example 1 for an OC-768 link using 40-byte packets. Thus the circuit has 8 nsec to produce
the output. Assume the input I and outputs O are N -bit vectors such that O[j ] = 1 if and only if
I [j ] = 1 and I [k] = 0 for all k < j . Notice that the output is represented in unary (often called 1-hot
representation) rather than binary. The specification leads directly to the combinational logic equation
O[j ] = I [1] . . . I [j − 1]I [j ] for j > 0.
     This design can be implemented directly using N AND gates, one for each output bit, where the N
gates take a number of inputs that range from 1 to N . Intuitively, since N input AND gates take O(N )
transistors, we have a design, Design 1, with O(N 2 ) transistors that appears to take O(1) time.3 Even
this level of design is helpful, though one can do better.
     A more area-economical design is based on the observation that every output bit O[j ] requires
the AND of the complement of the first j − 1 input bits. Thus we define the partial results P [j ] =
I [1] . . . I [j − 1] for j = 2 . . . N. Clearly, O[j ] = I [j ]P [j ]. But P [j ] can be constructed recursively us-
ing the equation P [j ] = P [j − 1]I [j − 1], which can be implemented using N two-input AND gates,
connected in series. This produces a design, Design 2, that takes O(N ) transistors but takes O(N ) time.
     Design 1 is fast and fat, and Design 2 is slow and lean. This is a familiar time–space trade-off
and suggests we can get something in between. The computation of P [j ] in Design 2 resembles an
unbalanced binary tree of height N . However, it is obvious that P [N ] can be computed using a fully


2 Alternatively, parts of the function can be parallelized/pipelined, but then each part must complete in 8 nsec.
3 A more precise argument, due to David Harris, using the method of Sutherland et al. (1999), shows the delay scales as
log(N log N ) because of the effort required to charge a tree of N transistors in each AND gate.
24       Chapter 2 Network implementation models



balanced binary of 2-input AND gates of height log N . A little thought then shows that the partial
results of the binary tree can be combined in simple ways to get P [j ] for all j < N using the same
binary tree (Wang and Huang, 2000).
    For example, if N = 8, to compute P [8] we compute X = I [0] . . . I [3] and Y = I [4] . . . I [7] and
compute the AND of X and Y at the root. Thus, it is easy to calculate P [5], for instance, using one
more AND gate by computing X · I [4]. Such a method is very commonly used by hardware designers
to replace apparently long O(N) computation chains with chains of length 2 log N . Since it was first
used to speed up carry chains in addition, it is known as carry look-ahead or simply look-ahead. While
look-ahead techniques appear complex, even software designers can master them because, at their core,
they use divide-and-conquer.


2.2.3 Raising the abstraction level of hardware design
Hand designing each transistor in a network chip design consisting of 1 million transistors would be
time consuming. The design process can be reduced to a few months using building blocks. A quick
description of building block technologies, such as PLAs, PALs, and standard cells, can be found in
Section A.2.5.
    The high-order bit, however, is that just as software designers reuse code, so also hardware designers
reuse a repertoire of commonly occurring functions. Besides common computational blocks, such as
adders, multipliers, comparators, and priority encoders, designs also use decoders, barrel shifters, mul-
tiplexers, and demultiplexers. It is helpful to be familiar with these “arrows” in the hardware designer’s
quiver.
    A decoder converts a log N -bit binary value to an N -bit unary encoding of the same value; while
binary representations are more compact, unary representations are more convenient for computation.
A barrel shifter shifts an input I by s positions to the left or right, with the bits shifted off from an end
coming around to the other end.
    A multiplexer (mux) connects one of several inputs to a common output, while its dual, the de-
multiplexer, routes one input to one of several possible outputs. More precisely, a multiplexer (mux)
connects one of n input bits Ij to the output O if a log n-bit select signal S encodes the value j in
binary. Its dual, the demultiplexer, connects input I to output Oj if the signal S encodes the value j in
binary.
    Thus the game becomes one of decomposing a complex logic function into instances of the standard
functions, even using recursion when needed. This is exactly akin to reduction and divide-and-conquer
and is easily picked up by software designers. For example, Fig. 2.3 shows the typical Lego puzzle faced
by hardware designers: Build a 4-input multiplexer from 2-input multiplexers. Start by choosing one of
I0 and I1 using a 2-input mux and then choosing one of I2 and I3 by another 2-input mux. Clearly, the
outputs of the 2-input muxes in the first stage must be combined using a third 2-input mux; the only
cleverness required is to realize that the select signal for the first two muxes is the least significant bit
S0 of the 2-bit select signal, while the third mux chooses between the upper and lower halves and so
uses S1 as the select bit.
    The following networking example shows that reduction is a powerful design tool for designing
critical networking functions.
Example 3. Crossbar Scheduling and Programmable Priority Encoders: Examples 1 and 2 motivated
and designed a fast priority encoder (PE). A commonly used router arbitration mechanism uses an
                                                                                       2.2 Hardware             25




FIGURE 2.3
Building a 4-input mux with select bits S0 and S1 from three 2-input muxes. The figure uses the standard trapezoidal
icon for a mux.


enhanced form of priority encoder called a programmable priority encoder (PPE). There is an N -bit
input I as before, together with an additional log N -bit input P . The PPE circuit must compute an
output O such that O[j ] = 1, where j is the first position beyond P (treated as a binary value) that has
a nonzero bit in I . If P = 0, this reduces to a simple priority encoder.
    PPEs arise naturally in switch arbitration (see Chapter 13 for details). For now, suppose a router
connects N communication links. Suppose several input links wish to transmit a packet at the same
time to output link L. To avoid contention at L, each of the inputs sends a request to L in the first time
slot; L chooses which input link to grant a request to in the second slot; the granted input sends a packet
in the third time slot.
    To make its grant decision, L can store the requests received at the end of Slot 1 in an N -bit request
vector R, where R[i] = 1 if input link i wishes to transmit to L. For fairness, L should remember the
last input link P it granted a request to. Then, L should confer the grant to the first input link beyond
P that has a request. This is exactly a PPE problem with R and P as inputs. Since a router must do
arbitration for each time slot and each output link, a fast and area-efficient PPE design is needed. Even
a software designer can understand and possibly repeat the process (Gupta and McKeown, 1999b) used
to design the PPE found in the Tiny Tera, a switch built at Stanford and later commercialized. The basic
idea is reduction: reducing the design of a PPE to the design of a PE (Example 2).
    The first idea is simple. A PPE is essentially a PE whose highest-priority value starts at position P
instead of at 0. A barrel shifter can be used to shift I first to the left by P bits. After this, a simple PE
can be used. Of course, the output-bit vector is now shifted; we recover the original order by shifting
the output of the PE to the right by P bits. A barrel shifter for N -bit inputs can be implemented using a
tree of 2-input multiplexers in around log N time. Thus two barrel shifters and a PE take around 3 log N
gate delays.
    A faster design used in Gupta and McKeown (1999b), which requires only 2 log N gate delays, is
as follows. Split the problem into two parts. If the input has some bit set at position P or greater, then
the result can be found by using a PE operating on the original input after setting to zero all input bits
26        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.4
The Tiny Tera PPE design uses copy 1 of a priority encoder to find the highest bit set, if any, of all bits greater than
P using a mask encoding of P . If such a bit is not found, the output of a second copy of a priority encoder is enabled
using the bottom AND gate. The results of the two copies are then combined using an N-input OR gate.


with positions less than P .4 On the other hand, if the input has no bit set at a position P or greater, then
the result can be found by using a PE on the original input with no masking at all. This results in the
design of Fig. 2.4, which, when tested on a Texas Instrument Cell Library, was nearly twice as fast and
took three times less area than the barrel shifter design for a 32-port router.
    The message here is that the logic design used for a time-critical component of a very influential
switch design can be achieved using simple reductions and simple models. Such models are not beyond
the reach of those of us who do not live and breathe digital design.


2.2.4 Memories
In endnodes and routers, packet forwarding is performed using combinational logic, but packets and
forwarding state are stored in memories. Since memory access times are significantly slower than logic
delays, memories form major bottlenecks in routers and endnodes.


4 This can be done by ANDing the input with P encoded as a mask; such a mask is commonly known in the hardware community
as a thermometer encoding of P .
                                                                                          2.2 Hardware               27



    Further, different subsystems require different memory characteristics. For example, router vendors
feel it is important to buffer 200 msec—an upper bound on a round-trip delay—worth of packets to
avoid dropping packets during periods of congestion. At, say, 40 Gbit/sec per link, such packet buffer-
ing requires an enormous amount of memory. On the other hand, router lookups require a smaller
amount of memory, which is accessed randomly. Thus it helps to have simple models for different
memory technologies. Next, we describe registers, SRAMs, DRAMs, and interleaved memory tech-
nology. Simple implementation models of these memory components can be found in Section A.2.4 in
Appendix.

Registers
A flip-flop is a way of connecting two or more transistors in a feedback loop so that (in the absence of
Writes and power failures) the bit stays indefinitely without “leaking” away. A register is an ordered
collection of flip-flops. For example, most modern processors have a collection of 32- or 64-bit on-chip
registers. A 32-bit register contains 32 flip-flops, each storing a bit. Access from logic to a register on
the same chip is extremely fast, around 0.5–1 nsec.

SRAM
A static random access memory (SRAM) contains N registers addressed by log N address bits A.
SRAM is so named because the underlying flip-flops refresh themselves and so are “static.” Besides
flip-flops, an SRAM also needs a decoder that decodes A into a unary value used to select the right
register. Accessing an SRAM on-chip is only slightly slower than accessing a register because of the
added decode delay. At the time of writing, it was possible to obtain on-chip SRAMs with 0.5-nsec
access times. Access times of 1–2 nsec for on-chip SRAM and 5–10 nsec for off-chip SRAM are
common.

Dynamic RAM
An SRAM bit cell requires at least five transistors. Thus SRAM is always less dense or more expensive
than memory technology based on dynamic RAM (DRAM). The key idea is to replace the feedback
loop (and extra transistors) used to store a bit in a flip-flop with an output capacitance that can store
the bit; thus the charge leaks, but it leaks slowly. Loss due to leakage is fixed by refreshing the DRAM
cell externally within a few milliseconds. Of course, the complexity comes in manufacturing a high
capacitance using a tiny amount of silicon.
    DRAM chips appear to quadruple in capacity every 3 years (Fromm et al., 1997) and are heading
towards 1 gigabit on a single chip. Addressing these bits, even if they are packed together as 4- or even
32-bit “registers,” is tricky. Recall that the address must be decoded from (say) 20 bits to (say) one of
220 values. The complexity of such decode logic suggests divide-and-conquer. Why not decode in two
stages?
    Fig. 2.5 shows that most memories are internally organized two-dimensionally into rows and
columns. The upper address bits are decoded to select the row, and then the lower address bits are
used to decode the column. More precisely, the user first supplies the row address bits and enables a
signal called RAS (row address strobe); later, the user supplies the column address bits,5 and enables

5 Many DRAM chips take advantage of the fact that row and column addresses are not required at the same time to multiplex
row and column addresses on the same set of pins, reducing the pin count of the chip.
28        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.5
Most large memories are organized two-dimensionally in terms of rows and columns. Selecting a word consists of
selecting first the row and then the column within the row.


a signal called CAS (column address strobe). After a specified time, the desired memory word can
be read
      √ out. Assuming equal-size rows and columns, this reduces decode gate complexity from O(N )
to O( (N )) at the expense of one extra decode delay. Besides the required delay between RAS and
CAS, there is also a precharge delay between successive RAS and CAS invocations to allow time for
capacitors to charge.
    The fastest off-chip DRAMs take around 40–60 nsec to access (latency), with longer times, such
as 100 nsec, between successive reads (throughput) because of precharge restrictions. Some of this
latency includes the time to drive the address using external lines onto the DRAM interface pins; recent
innovations allow on-chip DRAM with lower access times of around 30 nsec. It seems clear that DRAM
will always be denser but slower than SRAM.

Page-mode DRAMs
One reason to understand DRAM structure is to understand how function can follow form. A classic
example is a trick to speed up access times called page mode. Page mode is beneficial for access patterns
that exhibit spatial locality, in which adjacent memory words are successively accessed. But having
made a row access in Fig. 2.5, one can access words within the row without incurring additional RAS
and precharge delays. Video RAMs exploit the same structure by having a row read into an SRAM,
which can be read out serially to refresh a display at high speed. Besides page mode and video RAMS,
perhaps there are other ideas that exploit DRAM structure that could be useful in networking.

Interleaved DRAMs
While memory latency is critical for computation speed, memory throughput (often called bandwidth)
is also important for many network applications. Suppose a DRAM has a word size of 32 bits and a
cycle time of 100 nsec. Then the throughput using a single copy of the DRAM is limited to 32 bits
every 100 nsec. Clearly, throughput can be improved using access to multiple DRAMs. As in Fig. 2.6,
multiple DRAMs (called banks) can be strung together on a single bus. The user can start a Read to
                                                                               2.2 Hardware            29




FIGURE 2.6
The idea behind RAMBUS, SDRAM, and numerous variants is to create a single chip containing multiple DRAM
parallel memories to gain memory bandwidth while using only one set of address and data lines.


Bank 1 by placing the address on the address bus. Assume each DRAM bank takes 100 nsec to return
the selected data.
    Instead of idling during this 100-nsec delay, the user can place a second address for Bank 2, a third
for Bank 3, and so on. If the placing of each address takes 10 nsec, the user can “feed” 10 DRAM banks
before the answer to the first DRAM bank query arrives, followed 10 nsec later by the answer to the
second DRAM bank query, and so on. Thus the net memory bandwidth in this example is 10 times the
memory bandwidth of a single DRAM, as long as the user can arrange to have consecutive accesses
touch different banks.
    While using multiple memory banks is a very old idea, it is only in the last 5 years that memory
designers have integrated several banks into a single memory chip (Fig. 2.6), where the address and
data lines for all banks are multiplexed using a common high-speed network called a bus. In addition,
page-mode accesses are often allowed on each bank. Memory technologies based on this core idea
abound, with different values for the DRAM sizes, the protocol to read and write, and the number of
banks. Prominent examples include SDRAM with two banks and RDRAM with 16 banks.
Example 4. Pipelined Flow ID Lookups: A flow is characterized by source and destination IP addresses
and TCP ports. Some customers would like routers to keep track of the number of packets sent by each
network flow, for accounting purposes. This requires a data structure that stores a counter for each flow
ID and supports the two operations of Insert (FlowId) to insert a new flow ID, and Lookup (FlowId)
to find the location of a counter for a flow ID. Lookup requires an exact match on the flow ID—which
is around 96 bits—in the time to receive a packet. This can be done by any exact-matching algorithm,
such as hashing.
    However, if, as many router vendors wish to do, the worst-case lookup time must be small and
bounded, binary search (Cormen et al., 1990) is a better idea. Assume that flow ID lookups must be
done at wire speeds for worst-case 40-byte packets at 2.5 Gbits/sec or OC-48 speeds. Thus the chip has
128 nsec to look up a flow ID.
    To bound lookup delays, consider using a balanced binary tree, such as a B-tree. The logic for
tree traversal is fairly easy. For speed, ideally the flow IDs and counters should be stored in SRAM.
30        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.7
Solving the flow ID lookup problem by using a pipelined lookup chip that works on up to 16 concurrent flow ID
lookups, each of which accesses an independent bank of the RDRAM. The lookup chip returns an index to, say,
a network processor that updates the flow ID counter.



However, current estimates in core routers (Thompson et al., 1997) show around a million concurrent
flows. Keeping state for a million flows in SRAM is expensive. However, plain DRAM using a binary
tree with a branching factor of 2 would require log2 1,000,000 = 20 memory accesses. Even assuming
an optimistic DRAM cycle time of 50 nsec, the overall lookup time is 1 usec, which is too slow.
    A solution is to use pipelining, as shown in Fig. 2.7, where the pipelined logic accesses flow IDs
stored in an RDRAM with 16 banks of memory, as shown in Fig. 2.6. All the nodes at height i in the
binary tree are stored in Bank i of the RDRAM. The lookup chip works on 16 flow ID lookups (for
16 packets) concurrently. For example, after looking at the root node for Packet 1 in Bank 1, the chip
can look up the second-level tree node for Packet 1 in Bank 2 and (very slightly after that) look up the
root for Packet 2 in Bank 1. When Packet 1’s lookup “thread” is accessing Bank 16, Packet 16’s lookup
thread is accessing Bank 1. Since direct RDRAM runs at 800 MHz, the time between address requests
to the RAMBUS is small compared with the read access time of around 60 nsec. Thus while a single
packet takes around 16 ∗ 60 nsec to complete, processing 16 packets concurrently allows a throughput
of one flow ID lookup every 60 nsec.
    Unfortunately, a binary tree with 16 levels allows only 216 = 64 K flow IDs, which is too small.
Fortunately, RAMBUS allows a variation of page mode where 8 data words of 32 bits can be accessed
in almost the same time as 1 word. This allows us to retrieve two 96-bit keys and three 20-bit pointers
in one 256-bit memory access. Thus a tree with 3-way branching can be used, which allows potentially
316 , or potentially 43 million, flow IDs.


2.2.5 Memory subsystem design techniques
The flow ID lookup problem illustrates three major design techniques commonly used in memory
subsystem designs for networking chips.
• Memory Interleaving and Pipelining: Similar techniques are used in IP lookup, classification, and
  in scheduling algorithms that implement QoS. The multiple banks can be implemented using several
  external memories, a single external memory like a RAMBUS, or on-chip SRAM within a chip that
  also contains processing logic.
                                                                                          2.2 Hardware               31



• Wide Word Parallelism: A common theme in many networking designs, such as the Lucent bit
  vector scheme (Chapter 12), is to use wide memory words that can be processed in parallel. This
  can be implemented using DRAM and exploiting page mode or by using SRAM and making each
  memory word wider.
• Combining DRAM and SRAM: Given that SRAM is expensive and fast and that DRAM is cheap
  and slow, it makes sense to combine the two technologies to attempt to obtain the best of both
  worlds. While the use of SRAM as a cache for DRAM databases is classical, there are many more
  creative applications of the idea of a memory hierarchy. For instance, the exercises explore the effect
  of a small amount of SRAM on the design of the flow ID lookup chip. Chapter 16 describes a more
  unusual application of this technique to implement a large number of counters, where the low-order
  bits of each counter are stored in SRAM.
It is more important for a novice designer to understand these design techniques (than to know memory
implementation details) in order to produce creative hardware implementations of networking func-
tions.


2.2.6 Component-level design
The methods of the last two subsections can be used to implement a state machine that implements
arbitrary computation. A state machine has a current state stored in memory; the machine processes
inputs using combinatorial logic that reads the current state and possibly writes the state. An example
of a complex state machine is a Pentium processor, whose state is the combination of registers, caches,
and main memory. An example of a simpler state machine is the flow ID lookup chip of Fig. 2.7, whose
state is the registers used to track each of 16 concurrent lookups and the RDRAM storing the B-tree.
    While a few key chips may have to be designed to build a router or a network interface card, the
remainder of the design can be called component-level design: organizing and interconnecting chips
on a board and placing the board in a box while paying attention to form factor, power, and cooling. A
key aspect of the component-level design is understanding pin-count limitations, which often provide a
quick “parity check” on feasible designs.

Example 5. Pin-Count Implications for Router Buffers: Consider a router that has forty 10 Gb/sec
links. The overall buffering required is 200 msec * 400 Gb/sec, which is 80 gigabits. For cost and
power, we use DRAM for packet buffers. Since each packet must go in and out of the buffer, the overall
memory bandwidth needs to be twice the bandwidth into the box—i.e., 800 Gb/sec. Assuming 100%
overhead for internal packet headers, links between packets in queues, and wasted memory bandwidth,
it is reasonable to aim for 1600-Gb/sec memory bandwidth.
     Using a single direct 64-bit-wide RDRAM with 16 banks, specifications show peak memory band-
width of 1.28 GB/sec,6 or 10.24 Gb/sec. Accessing each RDRAM requires 64 interface pins for data
and 25 other pins for address and control, for a total of roughly 90 pins. A 1600-Gbps memory band-
width requires 160 RDRAMs, which require 14400 pins in total. A conservative upper bound on the
number of pins on a chip is around 1000. This implies that even if the router vendor were to build an


6 Assuming the DRAM takes 100 ns between reads, if the width is 64 bits (8 bytes), with a single bank we can read 8 bytes
every 100 ns (as mentioned on page 28), or 0.08 GB/sec.
32        Chapter 2 Network implementation models



extremely fast custom-designed packet-forwarding chip that could handle all packets at the maximum
box rate, one would still need at least one more chip to drive data in and out of the RAMBUS packet
buffers. Our message is that pin limitations are a key constraint in partitioning a design between chips.


2.2.7 Final hardware lessons
If all else is forgotten in this hardware design section, it is helpful to remember the design techniques
of Section 2.2.5. Knowledge of the following parameter values is also useful to help system designers
quickly weed out infeasible designs without detailed knowledge of hardware design. Unfortunately,
these parameters are a moving target, and the following numbers were written based on technology
available in 2004.
• Chip Complexity Scaling: The number of components per chip appears to double every 2 years.
  While 0.13-micron processes are common, 90-nm technology is ramping up, and 65-nm technology
  is expected after that. As a result, current ASICs can pack several million gate equivalents (that’s
  a lot of combinatorial logic) plus up to 50 Mbits (at the time of writing, using half a 12-mm/side
  die) of on-chip SRAM on an ASIC.7 Embedded DRAM is also a common option to get more space
  on-chip at the cost of larger latency.
• Chip Speeds: As feature sizes go down, on-chip clock speeds of 1 GHz are becoming common, with
  some chips even pushing close to 3 GHz. To put this in perspective, the clock cycle to do a piece
  of computation on a 1-GHz chip is 1 nsec. By using parallelism via pipelining and wide memory
  words, multiple operations can be performed per clock cycle.
• Chip I/O: The number of pins per chip grows, but rather slowly. While there are some promising
  technologies, it is best to assume that designs are pin limited to around 1000 pins.
• Serial I/O: Chip-to-chip I/O has also come a long way, with 10-Gbit serial links available to connect
  chips.
• Memory Scaling: On-chip SRAM with access times of 1 nsec are available, with even smaller ac-
  cess times being worked on. Off-chip SRAM with access times of 2.5 nsec are commonly available.
  On-chip DRAM access times are around 30 nsec, while off-chip DRAM of around 60 nsec is com-
  mon. Of course, the use of interleaved DRAM, as discussed in the memory subsection, is a good
  way to increase memory subsystem throughput for certain applications. DRAM costs roughly 4–10
  times less than SRAM per bit.
• Power and Packaging: The large power consumption of high-speed routers requires careful de-
  sign of the cooling system. Finally, most ISPs have severe rack space limitations, and so there is
  considerable pressure to build routers that have small form factors.
    These parameter values have clear implications for high-speed networking designs. For instance,
at OC-768 speeds, a 40-byte packet arrives in 3.2 nsec. Thus it seems clear that all states required to
process the packet must be in on-chip SRAM. While the amount of on-chip SRAM is growing, this
memory is not growing as fast as the number of flows seen by a router. Similarly, with 1-nsec SRAMs,
at most, three memory accesses can be made to a single memory bank in a packet arrival time.
    Thus the design techniques of Section 2.2.5 must be used within a chip to gain parallelism using
multiple memory banks and wide words and to increase the usable memory by creative combinations

7 FPGAs are more programmable chips that can only offer smaller amounts of on-chip SRAM.
                                                                     2.3 Network device architectures                         33



that involve off- and on-chip memory. However, given that chip densities and power constraints limit
parallelism to, say, a factor of at most 60, the bottom line is that all packet-processing functions at high
speeds must complete using at most 200 memory accesses and limited on-chip memory.8 Despite these
limitations, a rich variety of packet-processing functions have been implemented at high speeds.



2.3 Network device architectures
Optimizing network performance requires optimizing the path of data through the internals of the
source node, the sink node, and every router. Thus it is important to understand the internal archi-
tecture of endnodes and routers. The earlier part of this chapter argued that logic and memory can
be combined to form state machines. In essence, both routers and endnodes are state machines. How-
ever, their architectures are optimized for different purposes: endnode architectures (Section 2.3.1) for
general computation and router architectures (Section 2.3.2) for Internet communication.


2.3.1 Endnode architecture
A processor such as a Pentium is a state machine that takes a sequence of instructions and data as
input and writes output to I/O devices, such as printers and terminals. To allow programs that have a
large state space, the bulk of the processor state is stored externally in cheap DRAM. In PCs, this is
referred to as main memory and is often implemented using 1 GB or more of interleaved DRAM, such
as SDRAM. However, recall that DRAM access times are large, say, 60 nsec. If the processor state
were stored only in DRAM, an instruction would take 60 nsec to read or write to memory.
    Processors gain speed using caches, which are comparatively small chunks of SRAM that can store
commonly used pieces of state for faster access. Some SRAM (i.e., the L1 cache) is placed on the
processor chip, and some more SRAM (i.e., the L2 cache) is placed external to the processor. A cache
is a hash table that maps between memory address locations and contents. CPU caches use a simple
hash function: They extract some bits from the address to index into an array and then search in parallel
for all the addresses that map into the array element.9 When a memory location has to be read from
DRAM, it is placed in the cache, and an existing cache element may be evicted. Commonly used data
is stored in a data cache, and commonly used instructions in an instruction cache.
    Caching works well if the instructions and data exhibit temporal locality (i.e., the corresponding
location is reused frequently in a small time period) or spatial locality (i.e., accessing a location is
followed by access to a nearby location). Spatial locality is taken advantage of as follows. Recall that
accessing a DRAM location involves accessing a row R and then a column within the row. Thus reading
words within row R are cheaper after R is accessed. A Pentium takes advantage of this observation by
prefetching 128 (cache line size) contiguous bits into the cache whenever 32 bits of data are accessed.
Access to the adjoining 96 bits will not incur a cache miss penalty.


8 Of course, there are ways to work around these limits, for instance, by using multiple chips, but such implementations often
do badly in terms of cost, complexity, and power consumption.
9 The number of elements that can be searched in parallel in a hash bucket is called the associativity of the cache. While
router designers rightly consider bit extraction to be a poor hash function, the addition of associativity improves overall hashing
performance, especially on computing workloads.
