A Philosophy of Software Design

         John Ousterhout
        Stanford University
A Philosophy of Software Design
by John Ousterhout

Copyright © 2018-2021 John K. Ousterhout
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any form or by any means, without
permission in writing from the author.
Published by Yaknyam Press, Palo Alto, CA.

Cover design by Pete Nguyen and Shirin Oreizy (www.hellonextstep.com).

Printing History:
 April 2018:         First Edition (v1.0)
 November 2018:      First Edition (v1.01)
 July 2021:          Second Edition (v2.0)

ISBN 978-1-7321022-1-7

Digital book(s) (epub and mobi) produced by Booknook.biz.
Contents

Preface

1 Introduction
    1.1 How to use this book

2 The Nature of Complexity
    2.1 Complexity defined
    2.2 Symptoms of complexity
    2.3 Causes of complexity
    2.4 Complexity is incremental
    2.5 Conclusion

3 Working Code Isn’t Enough
   3.1 Tactical programming
   3.2 Strategic programming
   3.3 How much to invest?
   3.4 Startups and investment
   3.5 Conclusion

4 Modules Should Be Deep
   4.1 Modular design
   4.2 What’s in an interface?
   4.3 Abstractions
   4.4 Deep modules
   4.5 Shallow modules
   4.6 Classitis
   4.7 Examples: Java and Unix I/O
      4.8   Conclusion

5   Information Hiding (and Leakage)
      5.1 Information hiding
      5.2 Information leakage
      5.3 Temporal decomposition
      5.4 Example: HTTP server
      5.5 Example: too many classes
      5.6 Example: HTTP parameter handling
      5.7 Example: defaults in HTTP responses
      5.8 Information hiding within a class
      5.9 Taking it too far
      5.10 Conclusion

6   General-Purpose Modules are Deeper
     6.1 Make classes somewhat general-purpose
     6.2 Example: storing text for an editor
     6.3 A more general-purpose API
     6.4 Generality leads to better information hiding
     6.5 Questions to ask yourself
     6.6 Push specialization upwards (and downwards!)
     6.7 Example: editor undo mechanism
     6.8 Eliminate special cases in code
     6.9 Conclusion

7   Different Layer, Different Abstraction
      7.1 Pass-through methods
      7.2 When is interface duplication OK?
      7.3 Decorators
      7.4 Interface versus implementation
      7.5 Pass-through variables
      7.6 Conclusion
8   Pull Complexity Downwards
      8.1 Example: editor text class
      8.2 Example: configuration parameters
      8.3 Taking it too far
      8.4 Conclusion

9   Better Together Or Better Apart?
      9.1 Bring together if information is shared
      9.2 Bring together if it will simplify the interface
      9.3 Bring together to eliminate duplication
      9.4 Separate general-purpose and special-purpose code
      9.5 Example: insertion cursor and selection
      9.6 Example: separate class for logging
      9.7 Splitting and joining methods
      9.8 A different opinion: Clean Code
      9.9 Conclusion

10 Define Errors Out Of Existence
     10.1 Why exceptions add complexity
     10.2 Too many exceptions
     10.3 Define errors out of existence
     10.4 Example: file deletion in Windows
     10.5 Example: Java substring method
     10.6 Mask exceptions
     10.7 Exception aggregation
     10.8 Just crash?
     10.9 Taking it too far
     10.10 Conclusion

11 Design it Twice

12 Why Write Comments? The Four Excuses
     12.1 Good code is self-documenting
     12.2 I don’t have time to write comments
     12.3 Comments get out of date and become misleading
     12.4 All the comments I have seen are worthless
     12.5 Benefits of well-written comments
     12.6 A different opinion: comments are failures

13 Comments Should Describe Things that Aren’t Obvious from the Code
    13.1 Pick conventions
    13.2 Don’t repeat the code
    13.3 Lower-level comments add precision
    13.4 Higher-level comments enhance intuition
    13.5 Interface documentation
    13.6 Implementation comments: what and why, not how
    13.7 Cross-module design decisions
    13.8 Conclusion
    13.9 Answers to questions from Section 13.5

14 Choosing Names
     14.1 Example: bad names cause bugs
     14.2 Create an image
     14.3 Names should be precise
     14.4 Use names consistently
     14.5 Avoid extra words
     14.6 A different opinion: Go style guide
     14.7 Conclusion

15 Write The Comments First
    15.1 Delayed comments are bad comments
    15.2 Write the comments first
    15.3 Comments are a design tool
    15.4 Early comments are fun comments
     15.5 Are early comments expensive?
     15.6 Conclusion

16 Modifying Existing Code
    16.1 Stay strategic
    16.2 Maintaining comments: keep the comments near the code
    16.3 Comments belong in the code, not the commit log
    16.4 Maintaining comments: avoid duplication
    16.5 Maintaining comments: check the diffs
    16.6 Higher-level comments are easier to maintain

17 Consistency
     17.1 Examples of consistency
     17.2 Ensuring consistency
     17.3 Taking it too far
     17.4 Conclusion

18 Code Should be Obvious
     18.1 Things that make code more obvious
     18.2 Things that make code less obvious
     18.3 Conclusion

19 Software Trends
     19.1 Object-oriented programming and inheritance
     19.2 Agile development
     19.3 Unit tests
     19.4 Test-driven development
     19.5 Design patterns
     19.6 Getters and setters
     19.7 Conclusion

20 Designing for Performance
        20.1 How to think about performance
        20.2 Measure before (and after) modifying
        20.3 Design around the critical path
        20.4 An example: RAMCloud Buffers
        20.5 Conclusion

21 Decide What Matters
     21.1 How to decide what matters?
     21.2 Minimize what matters
     21.3 How to emphasize things that matter
     21.4 Mistakes
     21.5 Thinking more broadly

22 Conclusion

Index

Summary of Design Principles

Summary of Red Flags
Preface

People have been writing programs for electronic computers for more than 80
years, but there has been surprisingly little conversation about how to design
those programs or what good programs should look like. There has been
considerable discussion about software development processes such as agile
development and about development tools such as debuggers, version control
systems, and test coverage tools. There has also been extensive analysis of
programming techniques such as object-oriented programming and functional
programming, and of design patterns and algorithms. All of these discussions
have been valuable, but the core problem of software design is still largely
untouched. David Parnas’ classic paper “On the Criteria to be used in
Decomposing Systems into Modules” appeared in 1971, but the state of the art in
software design has not progressed much beyond that paper in the ensuing 45
years.
    The most fundamental problem in computer science is problem
decomposition: how to take a complex problem and divide it up into pieces that
can be solved independently. Problem decomposition is the central design task
that programmers face every day, and yet, other than the work described here, I
have not been able to identify a single class in any university where problem
decomposition is a central topic. We teach for loops and object-oriented
programming, but not software design.
    In addition, there is a huge variation in quality and productivity among
programmers, but we have made little attempt to understand what makes the best
programmers so much better or to teach those skills in our classes. I have talked
with several people I consider to be great programmers, but most of them had
difficulty articulating specific techniques that give them their advantage. Many
people assume that software design skill is an innate talent that cannot be taught.
However, there is quite a bit of scientific evidence that outstanding performance
in many fields is related more to high-quality practice than innate ability (see, for
example, Talent is Overrated by Geoff Colvin).
     For many years these issues have perplexed and frustrated me. I have
wondered whether software design can be taught, and I have hypothesized that
design skill is what separates great programmers from average ones. I finally
decided that the only way to answer these questions was to attempt to teach a
course on software design. The result is CS 190 at Stanford University. In this
class I put forth a set of principles of software design. Students then work
through a series of projects to assimilate and practice the principles. The class is
taught in a fashion similar to a traditional English writing class. In an English
class, students use an iterative process where they write a draft, get feedback, and
then rewrite to make improvements. In CS 190, students develop a substantial
piece of software from scratch. We then go through extensive code reviews to
identify design problems, and students revise their projects to fix the problems.
This allows students to see how their code can be improved by applying design
principles.
     I have now taught the software design class several times, and this book is
based on the design principles that emerged from the class. The principles are
fairly high level and border on the philosophical (“Define errors out of
existence”), so it is hard for students to understand the ideas in the abstract.
Students learn best by writing code, making mistakes, and then seeing how their
mistakes and the subsequent fixes relate to the principles.
     At this point you may well be wondering: what makes me think I know all
the answers about software design? To be honest, I don’t. There were no classes
on software design when I learned to program, and I never had a mentor to teach
me design principles. At the time I learned to program, code reviews were
virtually nonexistent. My ideas about software design come from personal
experience writing and reading code. Over my career I have written about
250,000 lines of code in a variety of languages. I’ve worked on teams that
created three operating systems from scratch, multiple file and storage systems,
infrastructure tools such as debuggers, build systems, and GUI toolkits, a
scripting language, and interactive editors for text, drawings, presentations, and
integrated circuits. Along the way I’ve experienced firsthand the problems of
large systems and experimented with various design techniques. In addition, I’ve
read a considerable amount of code written by other people, which has exposed
me to a variety of approaches, both good and bad.
     Out of all of this experience, I’ve tried to extract common threads, both about
mistakes to avoid and techniques to use. This book is a reflection of my
experiences: every problem described here is one that I have experienced
personally, and every suggested technique is one that I have used successfully in
my own coding.
    I don’t expect this book to be the final word on software design; I’m sure
there are valuable techniques that I’ve missed, and some of my suggestions may
turn out to be bad ideas in the long run. However, I hope that the book will start a
conversation about software design. Compare the ideas in this book with your
own experiences and decide for yourself whether the approaches described here
really do reduce software complexity. This book is an opinion piece, so some
readers will disagree with some of my suggestions. If you do disagree, try to
understand why. I’m interested in hearing about things that work for you, things
that don’t work, and any other ideas you may have about software design. I hope
that the ensuing conversations will improve our collective understanding of
software design. I will incorporate what I learn in future editions of this book.
    The best way to communicate with me about the book is to send email to the
following address:

                    software-design-book@googlegroups.com

    I’m interested in hearing specific feedback about the book, such as bugs or
suggestions for improvement, as well as general thoughts and experiences related
to software design. I’m particularly interested in compelling examples that I can
use in future editions of the book. The best examples illustrate an important
design principle and are simple enough to explain in a paragraph or two. If you
would like to see what other people are saying on the email address and
participate in discussions, you can join the Google Group software-design-book.
    If for some reason the software-design-book Google Group should disappear
in the future, search on the Web for my home page; it will contain updated
instructions for how to communicate about the book. Please don’t send book-
related email to my personal email address.
    I recommend that you take the suggestions in this book with a grain of salt.
The overall goal is to reduce complexity; this is more important than any
particular principle or idea you read here. If you try an idea from this book and
find that it doesn’t actually reduce complexity, then don’t feel obligated to keep
using it (but, do let me know about your experience; I’d like to get feedback on
what works and what doesn’t).
    Many people have offered criticisms or made suggestions that improved the
quality of the book. The following people offered helpful comments on various
drafts of the book: Abutalib Aghayev, Jeff Dean, Will Duquette, Sanjay
Ghemawat, John Hartman, Brian Kernighan, James Koppel, Amy Ousterhout,
Kay Ousterhout, Rob Pike, Partha Ranganathan, Daniel Rey, Keith Schwartz, and
Alex Snaps. Christos Kozyrakis suggested the terms “deep” and “shallow” for
classes and interfaces, replacing previous terms “thick” and “thin”, which were
somewhat ambiguous. I am indebted to the students in CS 190; the process of
reading their code and discussing it with them has helped to crystallize my
thoughts about design.
Chapter 1
Introduction
(It’s All About Complexity)

Writing computer software is one of the purest creative activities in the history of
the human race. Programmers aren’t bound by practical limitations such as the
laws of physics; we can create exciting virtual worlds with behaviors that could
never exist in the real world. Programming doesn’t require great physical skill or
coordination, like ballet or basketball. All programming requires is a creative
mind and the ability to organize your thoughts. If you can visualize a system, you
can probably implement it in a computer program.
    This means that the greatest limitation in writing software is our ability to
understand the systems we are creating. As a program evolves and acquires more
features, it becomes complicated, with subtle dependencies between its
components. Over time, complexity accumulates, and it becomes harder and
harder for programmers to keep all of the relevant factors in their minds as they
modify the system. This slows down development and leads to bugs, which slow
development even more and add to its cost. Complexity increases inevitably over
the life of any program. The larger the program, and the more people that work
on it, the more difficult it is to manage complexity.
    Good development tools can help us deal with complexity, and many great
tools have been created over the last several decades. But there is a limit to what
we can do with tools alone. If we want to make it easier to write software, so that
we can build more powerful systems more cheaply, we must find ways to make
software simpler. Complexity will still increase over time, in spite of our best
efforts, but simpler designs allow us to build larger and more powerful systems
before complexity becomes overwhelming.
    There are two general approaches to fighting complexity, both of which will
be discussed in this book. The first approach is to eliminate complexity by
making code simpler and more obvious. For example, complexity can be reduced
by eliminating special cases or using identifiers in a consistent fashion.
     The second approach to complexity is to encapsulate it, so that programmers
can work on a system without being exposed to all of its complexity at once. This
approach is called modular design. In modular design, a software system is
divided up into modules, such as classes in an object-oriented language. The
modules are designed to be relatively independent of each other, so that a
programmer can work on one module without having to understand the details of
other modules.
     Because software is so malleable, software design is a continuous process
that spans the entire lifecycle of a software system; this makes software design
different from the design of physical systems such as buildings, ships, or bridges.
However, software design has not always been viewed this way. In the early days
of programming, design was often concentrated at the beginning of a project, as
it is in other engineering disciplines. The extreme of this approach is called the
waterfall model, in which a project is divided into discrete phases such as
requirements definition, design, coding, testing, and maintenance. In the
waterfall model, each phase completes before the next phase starts; in many
cases different people are responsible for each phase. The entire system is
designed at once, during the design phase. The design is frozen at the end of this
phase, and the role of the subsequent phases is to flesh out and implement that
design.
     Unfortunately, the waterfall model rarely works well for software. Software
systems are intrinsically more complex than physical systems; it isn’t possible to
visualize the design for a large software system well enough to understand all of
its implications before building anything. As a result, the initial design will have
many problems. The problems do not become apparent until implementation is
well underway. However, the waterfall model is not structured to accommodate
major design changes at this point (for example, the designers may have moved
on to other projects). Thus, developers try to patch around the problems without
changing the overall design. This results in an explosion of complexity.
     Because of these issues, most software development projects today use an
incremental approach such as agile development, in which the initial design
focuses on a small subset of the overall functionality. This subset is designed,
implemented, and then evaluated. Problems with the original design are
discovered and corrected, then a few more features are designed, implemented
and evaluated. Each iteration exposes problems with the existing design, which
are fixed before the next set of features is designed. By spreading out the design
in this way, problems with the initial design can be fixed while the system is still
small; later features benefit from experience gained during the implementation of
earlier features, so they have fewer problems.
     The incremental approach works for software because software is malleable
enough to allow significant design changes partway through implementation. In
contrast, major design changes are much more challenging for physical systems:
for example, it would not be practical to change the number of towers supporting
a bridge in the middle of construction.
     Incremental development means that software design is never done. Design
happens continuously over the life of a system: developers should always be
thinking about design issues. Incremental development also means continuous
redesign. The initial design for a system or component is almost never the best
one; experience inevitably shows better ways to do things. As a software
developer, you should always be on the lookout for opportunities to improve the
design of the system you are working on, and you should plan on spending some
fraction of your time on design improvements.
     If software developers should always be thinking about design issues, and
reducing complexity is the most important element of software design, then
software developers should always be thinking about complexity. This book is
about how to use complexity to guide the design of software throughout its
lifetime.
     This book has two overall goals. The first is to describe the nature of
software complexity: what does “complexity” mean, why does it matter, and how
can you recognize when a program has unnecessary complexity? The book’s
second, and more challenging, goal is to present techniques you can use during
the software development process to minimize complexity. Unfortunately, there
isn’t a simple recipe that will guarantee great software designs. Instead, I will
present a collection of higher-level concepts that border on the philosophical,
such as “classes should be deep” or “define errors out of existence.” These
concepts may not immediately identify the best design, but you can use them to
compare design alternatives and guide your exploration of the design space.


1.1 How to use this book
Many of the design principles described here are somewhat abstract, so they may
be hard to appreciate without looking at actual code. It has been a challenge to
find examples that are small enough to include in the book, yet large enough to
illustrate problems with real systems (if you encounter good examples, please
send them to me). Thus, this book may not be sufficient by itself for you to learn
how to apply the principles.
    The best way to use this book is in conjunction with code reviews. When you
read other people’s code, think about whether it conforms to the concepts
discussed here and how that relates to the complexity of the code. It’s easier to
see design problems in someone else’s code than your own. You can use the red
flags described here to identify problems and suggest improvements. Reviewing
code will also expose you to new design approaches and programming
techniques.
    One of the best ways to improve your design skills is to learn to recognize red
flags: signs that a piece of code is probably more complicated than it needs to be.
Over the course of this book I will point out red flags that suggest problems
related to each major design issue; the most important ones are summarized at
the back of the book. You can then use these when you are coding: when you see
a red flag, stop and look for an alternate design that eliminates the problem.
When you first try this approach, you may have to try several design alternatives
before you find one that eliminates the red flag. Don’t give up easily: the more
alternatives you try before fixing the problem, the more you will learn. Over
time, you will find that your code has fewer and fewer red flags, and your designs
are cleaner and cleaner. Your experience will also show you other red flags that
you can use to identify design problems (I’d be happy to hear about these).
    When applying the ideas from this book, it’s important to use moderation and
discretion. Every rule has its exceptions, and every principle has its limits. If you
take any design idea to its extreme, you will probably end up in a bad place.
Beautiful designs reflect a balance between competing ideas and approaches.
Several chapters have sections titled “Taking it too far,” which describe how to
recognize when you are overdoing a good thing.
    Almost all of the examples in this book are in Java or C++, and much of the
discussion is in terms of designing classes in an object-oriented language.
However, the ideas apply in other domains as well. Almost all of the ideas related
to methods can also be applied to functions in a language without object-oriented
features, such as C. The design ideas also apply to modules other than classes,
such as subsystems or network services.
   With this background, let’s discuss in more detail what causes complexity,
and how to make software systems simpler.
Chapter 2
The Nature of Complexity

This book is about how to design software systems to minimize their complexity.
The first step is to understand the enemy. Exactly what is “complexity”? How
can you tell if a system is unnecessarily complex? What causes systems to
become complex? This chapter will address those questions at a high level;
subsequent chapters will show you how to recognize complexity at a lower level,
in terms of specific structural features.
    The ability to recognize complexity is a crucial design skill. It allows you to
identify problems before you invest a lot of effort in them, and it allows you to
make good choices among alternatives. It is easier to tell whether a design is
simple than it is to create a simple design, but once you can recognize that a
system is too complicated, you can use that ability to guide your design
philosophy towards simplicity. If a design appears complicated, try a different
approach and see if that is simpler. Over time, you will notice that certain
techniques tend to result in simpler designs, while others correlate with
complexity. This will allow you to produce simpler designs more quickly.
    This chapter also lays out some basic assumptions that provide a foundation
for the rest of the book. Later chapters take the material of this chapter as given
and use it to justify a variety of refinements and conclusions.


2.1 Complexity defined
For the purposes of this book, I define “complexity” in a practical way.
Complexity is anything related to the structure of a software system that
makes it hard to understand and modify the system. Complexity can take
many forms. For example, it might be hard to understand how a piece of code
works; it might take a lot of effort to implement a small improvement, or it might
not be clear which parts of the system must be modified to make the
improvement; it might be difficult to fix one bug without introducing another. If
a software system is hard to understand and modify, then it is complicated; if it is
easy to understand and modify, then it is simple.
    You can also think of complexity in terms of cost and benefit. In a complex
system, it takes a lot of work to implement even small improvements. In a simple
system, larger improvements can be implemented with less effort.
    Complexity is what a developer experiences at a particular point in time
when trying to achieve a particular goal. It doesn’t necessarily relate to the
overall size or functionality of the system. People often use the word “complex”
to describe large systems with sophisticated features, but if such a system is easy
to work on, then, for the purposes of this book, it is not complex. Of course,
almost all large and sophisticated software systems are in fact hard to work on, so
they also meet my definition of complexity, but this need not necessarily be the
case. It is also possible for a small and unsophisticated system to be quite
complex.
    Complexity is determined by the activities that are most common. If a system
has a few parts that are very complicated, but those parts almost never need to be
touched, then they don’t have much impact on the overall complexity of the
system. To characterize this in a crude mathematical way:




The overall complexity of a system (C) is determined by the complexity of each
part p (cp) weighted by the fraction of time developers spend working on that
part (tp). Isolating complexity in a place where it will never be seen is almost as
good as eliminating the complexity entirely.
    Complexity is more apparent to readers than writers. If you write a piece of
code and it seems simple to you, but other people think it is complex, then it is
complex. When you find yourself in situations like this, it’s worth probing the
other developers to find out why the code seems complex to them; there are
probably some interesting lessons to learn from the disconnect between your
opinion and theirs. Your job as a developer is not just to create code that you can
work with easily, but to create code that others can also work with easily.
2.2 Symptoms of complexity
Complexity manifests itself in three general ways, which are described in the
paragraphs below. Each of these manifestations makes it harder to carry out
development tasks.
    Change amplification: The first symptom of complexity is that a seemingly
simple change requires code modifications in many different places. For
example, consider a Web site containing several pages, each of which displays a
banner with a background color. In many early Web sites, the color was specified
explicitly on each page, as shown in Figure 2.1(a). In order to change the
background for such a Web site, a developer might have to modify every existing
page by hand; this would be nearly impossible for a large site with thousands of
pages. Fortunately, modern Web sites use an approach like that in Figure 2.1(b),
where the banner color is specified once in a central place, and all of the
individual pages reference that shared value. With this approach, the banner
color of the entire Web site can be changed with a single modification. One of
the goals of good design is to reduce the amount of code that is affected by each
design decision, so design changes don’t require very many code modifications.
    Cognitive load: The second symptom of complexity is cognitive load, which
refers to how much a developer needs to know in order to complete a task. A
higher cognitive load means that developers have to spend more time learning
the required information, and there is a greater risk of bugs because they have
missed something important. For example, suppose a function in C allocates
memory, returns a pointer to that memory, and assumes that the caller will free
the memory. This adds to the cognitive load of developers using the function; if a
developer fails to free the memory, there will be a memory leak. If the system
can be restructured so that the caller doesn’t need to worry about freeing the
memory (the same module that allocates the memory also takes responsibility for
freeing it), it will reduce the cognitive load. Cognitive load arises in many ways,
such as APIs with many methods, global variables, inconsistencies, and
dependencies between modules.
    System designers sometimes assume that complexity can be measured by
lines of code. They assume that if one implementation is shorter than another,
then it must be simpler; if it only takes a few lines of code to make a change, then
the change must be easy. However, this view ignores the costs associated with
cognitive load. I have seen frameworks that allowed applications to be written
with only a few lines of code, but it was extremely difficult to figure out what
those lines were. Sometimes an approach that requires more lines of code is
actually simpler, because it reduces cognitive load.




Figure 2.1: Each page in a Web site displays a colored banner. In (a) the background color for the banner is
specified explicitly in each page. In (b) a shared variable holds the background color and each page
references that variable. In (c) some pages display an additional color for emphasis, which is a darker shade
of the banner background color; if the background color changes, the emphasis color must also change.

    Unknown unknowns: The third symptom of complexity is that it is not
obvious which pieces of code must be modified to complete a task, or what
information a developer must have to carry out the task successfully. Figure
2.1(c) illustrates this problem. The Web site uses a central variable to determine
the banner background color, so it appears to be easy to change. However, a few
Web pages use a darker shade of the background color for emphasis, and that
darker color is specified explicitly in the individual pages. If the background
color changes, then the the emphasis color must change to match. Unfortunately,
developers are unlikely to realize this, so they may change the central bannerBg
variable without updating the emphasis color. Even if a developer is aware of the
problem, it won’t be obvious which pages use the emphasis color, so the
developer may have to search every page in the Web site.
    Of the three manifestations of complexity, unknown unknowns are the worst.
An unknown unknown means that there is something you need to know, but there
is no way for you to find out what it is, or even whether there is an issue. You
won’t find out about it until bugs appear after you make a change. Change
amplification is annoying, but as long as it is clear which code needs to be
modified, the system will work once the change has been completed. Similarly, a
high cognitive load will increase the cost of a change, but if it is clear which
information to read, the change is still likely to be correct. With unknown
unknowns, it is unclear what to do or whether a proposed solution will even
work. The only way to be certain is to read every line of code in the system,
which is impossible for systems of any size. Even this may not be sufficient,
because a change may depend on a subtle design decision that was never
documented.
    One of the most important goals of good design is for a system to be obvious.
This is the opposite of high cognitive load and unknown unknowns. In an
obvious system, a developer can quickly understand how the existing code works
and what is required to make a change. An obvious system is one where a
developer can make a quick guess about what to do, without thinking very hard,
and yet be confident that the guess is correct. Chapter 18 discusses techniques for
making code more obvious.


2.3 Causes of complexity
Now that you know the high-level symptoms of complexity and why complexity
makes software development difficult, the next step is to understand what causes
complexity, so that we can design systems to avoid the problems. Complexity is
caused by two things: dependencies and obscurity. This section discusses these
factors at a high level; subsequent chapters will discuss how they relate to lower-
level design decisions.
    For the purposes of this book, a dependency exists when a given piece of
code cannot be understood and modified in isolation; the code relates in some
way to other code, and the other code must be considered and/or modified if the
given code is changed. In the Web site example of Figure 2.1(a), the background
color creates dependencies between all of the pages. All of the pages need to
have the same background, so if the background is changed for one page, then it
must be changed for all of them. Another example of dependencies occurs in
network protocols. Typically there is separate code for the sender and receiver for
the protocol, but they must each conform to the protocol; changing the code for
the sender almost always requires corresponding changes at the receiver, and vice
versa. The signature of a method creates a dependency between the
implementation of that method and the code that invokes it: if a new parameter is
added to a method, all of the invocations of that method must be modified to
specify that parameter.
    Dependencies are a fundamental part of software and can’t be completely
eliminated. In fact, we intentionally introduce dependencies as part of the
software design process. Every time you write a new class you create
dependencies around the API for that class. However, one of the goals of
software design is to reduce the number of dependencies and to make the
dependencies that remain as simple and obvious as possible.
    Consider the Web site example. In the old Web site with the background
specified separately on each page, all of the Web pages were dependent on each
other. The new Web site fixed this problem by specifying the background color
in a central place and providing an API that individual pages use to retrieve that
color when they are rendered. The new Web site eliminated the dependency
between the pages, but it created a new dependency around the API for retrieving
the background color. Fortunately, the new dependency is more obvious: it is
clear that each individual Web page depends on the bannerBg color, and a
developer can easily find all the places where the variable is used by searching
for its name. Furthermore, compilers help to manage API dependencies: if the
name of the shared variable changes, compilation errors will occur in any code
that still uses the old name. The new Web site replaced a nonobvious and
difficult-to-manage dependency with a simpler and more obvious one.
    The second cause of complexity is obscurity. Obscurity occurs when
important information is not obvious. A simple example is a variable name that
is so generic that it doesn’t carry much useful information (e.g., time). Or, the
documentation for a variable might not specify its units, so the only way to find
out is to scan code for places where the variable is used. Obscurity is often
associated with dependencies, where it is not obvious that a dependency exists.
For example, if a new error status is added to a system, it may be necessary to
add an entry to a table holding string messages for each status, but the existence
of the message table might not be obvious to a programmer looking at the status
declaration. Inconsistency is also a major contributor to obscurity: if the same
variable name is used for two different purposes, it won’t be obvious to
developers which of these purposes a particular variable serves.
    In many cases, obscurity comes about because of inadequate documentation;
Chapter 13 deals with this topic. However, obscurity is also a design issue. If a
system has a clean and obvious design, then it will need less documentation. The
need for extensive documentation is often a red flag that the design isn’t quite
right. The best way to reduce obscurity is by simplifying the system design.
    Together, dependencies and obscurity account for the three manifestations of
complexity described in Section 2.2. Dependencies lead to change amplification
and a high cognitive load. Obscurity creates unknown unknowns, and also
contributes to cognitive load. If we can find design techniques that minimize
dependencies and obscurity, then we can reduce the complexity of software.


2.4 Complexity is incremental
Complexity isn’t caused by a single catastrophic error; it accumulates in lots of
small chunks. A single dependency or obscurity, by itself, is unlikely to affect
significantly the maintainability of a software system. Complexity comes about
because hundreds or thousands of small dependencies and obscurities build up
over time. Eventually, there are so many of these small issues that every possible
change to the system is affected by several of them.
    The incremental nature of complexity makes it hard to control. It’s easy to
convince yourself that a little bit of complexity introduced by your current
change is no big deal. However, if every developer takes this approach for every
change, complexity accumulates rapidly. Once complexity has accumulated, it is
hard to eliminate, since fixing a single dependency or obscurity will not, by
itself, make a big difference. In order to slow the growth of complexity, you must
adopt a “zero tolerance” philosophy, as discussed in Chapter 3.


2.5 Conclusion
Complexity comes from an accumulation of dependencies and obscurities. As
complexity increases, it leads to change amplification, a high cognitive load, and
unknown unknowns. As a result, it takes more code modifications to implement
each new feature. In addition, developers spend more time acquiring enough
information to make the change safely and, in the worst case, they can’t even find
all the information they need. The bottom line is that complexity makes it
difficult and risky to modify an existing code base.
Chapter 3
Working Code Isn’t Enough
(Strategic vs. Tactical Programming)

One of the most important elements of good software design is the mindset you
adopt when you approach a programming task. Many organizations encourage a
tactical mindset, focused on getting features working as quickly as possible.
However, if you want a good design, you must take a more strategic approach
where you invest time to produce clean designs and fix problems. This chapter
discusses why the strategic approach produces better designs and is actually
cheaper than the tactical approach over the long run.


3.1 Tactical programming
Most programmers approach software development with a mindset I call tactical
programming. In the tactical approach, your main focus is to get something
working, such as a new feature or a bug fix. At first glance this seems totally
reasonable: what could be more important than writing code that works?
However, tactical programming makes it nearly impossible to produce a good
system design.
    The problem with tactical programming is that it is short-sighted. If you’re
programming tactically, you’re trying to finish a task as quickly as possible.
Perhaps you have a hard deadline. As a result, planning for the future isn’t a
priority. You don’t spend much time looking for the best design; you just want to
get something working soon. You tell yourself that it’s OK to add a bit of
complexity or introduce a small kludge or two, if that allows the current task to
be completed more quickly.
    This is how systems become complicated. As discussed in the previous
chapter, complexity is incremental. It’s not one particular thing that makes a
system complicated, but the accumulation of dozens or hundreds of small things.
If you program tactically, each programming task will contribute a few of these
complexities. Each of them probably seems like a reasonable compromise in
order to finish the current task quickly. However, the complexities accumulate
rapidly, especially if everyone is programming tactically.
    Before long, some of the complexities will start causing problems, and you
will begin to wish you hadn’t taken those early shortcuts. But, you will tell
yourself that it’s more important to get the next feature working than to go back
and refactor existing code. Refactoring may help out in the long run, but it will
definitely slow down the current task. So, you look for quick patches to work
around any problems you encounter. This just creates more complexity, which
then requires more patches. Pretty soon the code is a mess, but by this point
things are so bad that it would take months of work to clean it up. There’s no way
your schedule can tolerate that kind of delay, and fixing one or two of the
problems doesn’t seem like it will make much difference, so you just keep
programming tactically.
    If you have worked on a large software project for very long, I suspect you
have seen tactical programming at work and have experienced the problems that
result. Once you start down the tactical path, it’s difficult to change.
    Almost every software development organization has at least one developer
who takes tactical programming to the extreme: a tactical tornado. The tactical
tornado is a prolific programmer who pumps out code far faster than others but
works in a totally tactical fashion. When it comes to implementing a quick
feature, nobody gets it done faster than the tactical tornado. In some
organizations, management treats tactical tornadoes as heroes. However, tactical
tornadoes leave behind a wake of destruction. They are rarely considered heroes
by the engineers who must work with their code in the future. Typically, other
engineers must clean up the messes left behind by the tactical tornado, which
makes it appear that those engineers (who are the real heroes) are making slower
progress than the tactical tornado.


3.2 Strategic programming
The first step towards becoming a good software designer is to realize that
working code isn’t enough. It’s not acceptable to introduce unnecessary
complexities in order to finish your current task faster. The most important thing
is the long-term structure of the system. Most of the code in any system is
written by extending the existing code base, so your most important job as a
developer is to facilitate those future extensions. Thus, you should not think of
“working code” as your primary goal, though of course your code must work.
Your primary goal must be to produce a great design, which also happens to
work. This is strategic programming.
     Strategic programming requires an investment mindset. Rather than taking
the fastest path to finish your current project, you must invest time to improve the
design of the system. These investments will slow you down a bit in the short
term, but they will speed you up in the long term, as illustrated in Figure 3.1.
     Some of the investments will be proactive. For example, it’s worth taking a
little extra time to find a simple design for each new class; rather than
implementing the first idea that comes to mind, try a couple of alternative
designs and pick the cleanest one. Try to imagine a few ways in which the system
might need to be changed in the future and make sure that will be easy with your
design. Writing good documentation is another example of a proactive
investment.
     Other investments will be reactive. No matter how much you invest up front,
there will inevitably be mistakes in your design decisions. Over time, these
mistakes will become obvious. When you discover a design problem, don’t just
ignore it or patch around it; take a little extra time to fix it. If you program
strategically, you will continually make small improvements to the system
design. This is the opposite of tactical programming, where you are continually
adding small bits of complexity that cause problems in the future.


3.3 How much to invest?
So, what is the right amount of investment? A huge up-front investment, such as
trying to design the entire system, won’t be effective. This is the waterfall
method, and we know it doesn’t work. The ideal design tends to emerge in bits
and pieces, as you get experience with the system. Thus, the best approach is to
make lots of small investments on a continual basis. I suggest spending about 10–
20% of your total development time on investments. This amount is small
enough that it won’t impact your schedules significantly, but large enough to
produce significant benefits over time. Your initial projects will thus take 10–
20% longer than they would in a purely tactical approach. That extra time will
result in a better software design, and you will start experiencing the benefits
within a few months. It won’t be long before you’re developing at least 10–20%
faster than you would if you had programmed tactically. At this point your
investments become free: the benefits from your past investments will save
enough time to cover the cost of future investments. You will quickly recover the
cost of the initial investment. Figure 3.1 illustrates this phenomenon.




Figure 3.1: At the beginning, a tactical approach to programming will make progress more quickly than a
strategic approach. However, complexity accumulates more rapidly under the tactical approach, which
reduces productivity. Over time, the strategic approach results in greater progress. Note: this figure is
intended only as a qualitative illustration; I am not aware of any empirical measurements of the precise
shapes of the curves.

    Conversely, if you program tactically, you will finish your first projects 10–
20% faster, but over time your development speed will slow as complexity
accumulates. It won’t be long before you’re programming at least 10–20%
slower. You will quickly give back all of the time you saved at the beginning, and
for the rest of system’s lifetime you will be developing more slowly than if you
had taken the strategic approach. If you haven’t ever worked in a badly degraded
code base, talk to someone who has; they will tell you that poor code quality
slows development by at least 20%.
    The term technical debt is often used to describe the problems caused by
tactical programming. By programming tactically you are borrowing time from
the future: development will go more quickly now, but more slowly later on. As
with financial debt, the amount you pay back will exceed the amount you
borrowed. Unlike financial debt, most technical debt is never fully repaid: you’ll
keep paying and paying forever.
