    Figure 3.1 raises an important question: where is the crossover point between
the strategic and tactical curves? In other words, how long does it take before the
strategic approach has paid for itself? Unfortunately I am not aware of any data
on this topic, and it would be difficult to perform the kind of controlled
experiment needed to answer the question in a convincing fashion. My personal
opinion is that the time to payback is somewhere in the range of 6–18 months.
This has a lot to do with developers’ memory: by the time a piece of code is a
few months old, developers have forgotten most of what was in their minds when
they wrote it, so development will slow down significantly if the code is
complex. These additional costs quickly compensate for any initial gains from
strategic programming. Again, this is just my opinion, and I don’t have any data
to back it up.


3.4 Startups and investment
In some environments there are strong forces working against the strategic
approach. For example, early-stage startups feel tremendous pressure to get their
early releases out quickly. In these companies, it might seem that even a 10–20%
investment isn’t affordable. As a result, many startups take a tactical approach,
spending little effort on design and even less on cleanup when problems pop up.
They rationalize this with the thought that, if they are successful, they’ll have
enough money to hire extra engineers to clean things up.
    If you are in a company leaning in this direction, you should realize that once
a code base turns to spaghetti, it is nearly impossible to fix. You will probably
pay high development costs for the life of the product. Furthermore, the payoff
for good (or bad) design comes pretty quickly, so there’s a good chance that the
tactical approach won’t even speed up your first product release.
    Another thing to consider is that one of the most important factors for
success of a company is the quality of its engineers. The best way to lower
development costs is to hire great engineers: they don’t cost much more than
mediocre engineers but have tremendously higher productivity. However, the best
engineers care deeply about good design. If your code base is a wreck, word will
get out, and this will make it harder for you to recruit. As a result, you are likely
to end up with mediocre engineers. This will increase your future costs and
probably cause the system structure to degrade even more.
    Facebook is an example of a startup that encouraged tactical programming.
For many years the company’s motto was “Move fast and break things.” New
engineers fresh out of college were encouraged to dive immediately into the
company’s code base; it was normal for engineers to push commits into
production in their first week on the job. On the positive side, Facebook
developed a reputation as a company that empowered its employees. Engineers
had tremendous latitude, and there were few rules and restrictions to get in their
way.
    Facebook has been spectacularly successful as a company, but its code base
suffered because of the company’s tactical approach; much of the code was
unstable and hard to understand, with few comments or tests, and painful to work
with. Over time the company realized that its culture was unsustainable.
Eventually, Facebook changed its motto to “Move fast with solid infrastructure”
to encourage its engineers to invest more in good design. It remains to be seen
whether Facebook can successfully clean up the problems that accumulated over
years of tactical programming.
    In fairness to Facebook, I should point out that Facebook’s code probably
isn’t much worse than average among startups. Tactical programming is
commonplace among startups; Facebook just happens to be a particularly visible
example.
    Fortunately, it is also possible to succeed in Silicon Valley with a strategic
approach. Google and VMware grew up around the same time as Facebook, but
both of these companies embraced a more strategic approach. Both companies
placed a heavy emphasis on high quality code and good design, and both
companies built sophisticated products that solved complex problems with
reliable software systems. The companies’ strong technical cultures became well
known in Silicon Valley. Few other companies could compete with them for
hiring the top technical talent.
    These examples show that a company can succeed with either approach.
However, it’s a lot more fun to work in a company that cares about software
design and has a clean code base.


3.5 Conclusion
Good design doesn’t come for free. It has to be something you invest in
continually, so that small problems don’t accumulate into big ones. Fortunately,
good design eventually pays for itself, and sooner than you might think.
    It’s crucial to be consistent in applying the strategic approach and to think of
investment as something to do today, not tomorrow. When you get in a crunch it
will be tempting to put off cleanups until after the crunch is over. However, this
is a slippery slope; after the current crunch there will almost certainly be another
one, and another after that. Once you start delaying design improvements, it’s
easy for the delays to become permanent and for your culture to slip into the
tactical approach. The longer you wait to address design problems, the bigger
they become; the solutions become more intimidating, which makes it easy to
put them off even more. The most effective approach is one where every
engineer makes continuous small investments in good design.
Chapter 4
Modules Should Be Deep

One of the most important techniques for managing software complexity is to
design systems so that developers only need to face a small fraction of the overall
complexity at any given time. This approach is called modular design, and this
chapter presents its basic principles.


4.1 Modular design
In modular design, a software system is decomposed into a collection of modules
that are relatively independent. Modules can take many forms, such as classes,
subsystems, or services. In an ideal world, each module would be completely
independent of the others: a developer could work in any of the modules without
knowing anything about any of the other modules. In this world, the complexity
of a system would be the complexity of its worst module.
     Unfortunately, this ideal is not achievable. Modules must work together by
calling each others’s functions or methods. As a result, modules must know
something about each other. There will be dependencies between the modules: if
one module changes, other modules may need to change to match. For example,
the arguments for a method create a dependency between the method and any
code that invokes the method. If the required arguments change, all invocations
of the method must be modified to conform to the new signature. Dependencies
can take many other forms, and they can be quite subtle; as one example, a
method may not function correctly unless some other method has been invoked
first. The goal of modular design is to minimize the dependencies between
modules.
     In order to identify and manage dependencies, we think of each module in
two parts: an interface and an implementation. The interface consists of
everything that a developer working in a different module must know in order to
use the given module. Typically, the interface describes what the module does
but not how it does it. The implementation consists of the code that carries out
the promises made by the interface. A developer working in a particular module
must understand the interface and implementation of that module, plus the
interfaces of any other modules invoked by the given module. A developer
should not need to understand the implementations of modules other than the
one he or she is working in.
    Consider a module that implements balanced trees. The module probably
contains sophisticated code for ensuring that the tree remains balanced. However,
this complexity is not visible to users of the module. Users see a relatively simple
interface for invoking operations to insert, remove, and fetch nodes in the tree. To
invoke an insert operation, the caller need only provide the key and value for the
new node; the mechanisms for traversing the tree and splitting nodes are not
visible in the interface.
    For the purposes of this book, a module is any unit of code that has an
interface and an implementation. Each class in an object-oriented programming
language is a module. Methods within a class, or functions in a language that
isn’t object-oriented, can also be thought of as modules: each of these has an
interface and an implementation, and modular design techniques can be applied
to them. Higher-level subsystems and services are also modules; their interfaces
may take different forms, such as kernel calls or HTTP requests. Much of the
discussion about modular design in this book focuses on designing classes, but
the techniques and concepts apply to other kinds of modules as well.
    The best modules are those whose interfaces are much simpler than their
implementations. Such modules have two advantages. First, a simple interface
minimizes the complexity that a module imposes on the rest of the system.
Second, if a module is modified in a way that does not change its interface, then
no other module will be affected by the modification. If a module’s interface is
much simpler than its implementation, there will be many aspects of the module
that can be changed without affecting other modules.


4.2 What’s in an interface?
The interface to a module contains two kinds of information: formal and
informal. The formal parts of an interface are specified explicitly in the code, and
some of these can be checked for correctness by the programming language. For
example, the formal interface for a method is its signature, which includes the
names and types of its parameters, the type of its return value, and information
about exceptions thrown by the method. Most programming languages ensure
that each invocation of a method provides the right number and types of
arguments to match its signature. The formal interface for a class consists of the
signatures for all of its public methods, plus the names and types of any public
variables.
    Each interface also includes informal elements. These are not specified in a
way that can be understood or enforced by the programming language. The
informal parts of an interface include its high-level behavior, such as the fact that
a function deletes the file named by one of its arguments. If there are constraints
on the usage of a class (perhaps one method must be called before another), these
are also part of the class’s interface. In general, if a developer needs to know a
particular piece of information in order to use a module, then that information is
part of the module’s interface. The informal aspects of an interface can only be
described using comments, and the programming language cannot ensure that
the description is complete or accurate1. For most interfaces the informal aspects
are larger and more complex than the formal aspects.
    One of the benefits of a clearly specified interface is that it indicates exactly
what developers need to know in order to use the associated module. This helps
to eliminate the “unknown unknowns” problem described in Section 2.2.


4.3 Abstractions
The term abstraction is closely related to the idea of modular design. An
abstraction is a simplified view of an entity, which omits unimportant
details. Abstractions are useful because they make it easier for us to think about
and manipulate complex things.
    In modular programming, each module provides an abstraction in the form of
its interface. The interface presents a simplified view of the module’s
functionality; the details of the implementation are unimportant from the
standpoint of the module’s abstraction, so they are omitted from the interface.
    In the definition of abstraction, the word “unimportant” is crucial. The more
unimportant details that are omitted from an abstraction, the better. However, a
detail can only be omitted from an abstraction if it really is unimportant. An
abstraction can go wrong in two ways. First, it can include details that are not
really important; when this happens, it makes the abstraction more complicated
than necessary, which increases the cognitive load on developers using the
abstraction. The second error is when an abstraction omits details that really are
important. This results in obscurity: developers looking only at the abstraction
will not have all the information they need to use the abstraction correctly. An
abstraction that omits important details is a false abstraction: it might appear
simple, but in reality it isn’t. The key to designing abstractions is to understand
what is important, and to look for designs that minimize the amount of
information that is important.
    As an example, consider a file system. The abstraction provided by a file
system omits many details, such as the mechanism for choosing which blocks on
a storage device to use for the data in a given file. These details are unimportant
to users of the file system (as long as the system provides adequate performance).
However, some of the details of a file system’s implementation are important to
users. Most file systems cache data in main memory, and they may delay writing
new data to the storage device in order to improve performance. Some
applications, such as databases, need to know exactly when data is written
through to storage, so they can ensure that data will be preserved after system
crashes. Thus, the rules for flushing data to secondary storage must be visible in
the file system’s interface.
    We depend on abstractions to manage complexity not just in programming,
but pervasively in our everyday lives. A microwave oven contains complex
electronics to convert alternating current into microwave radiation and distribute
that radiation throughout the cooking cavity. Fortunately, users see a much
simpler abstraction, consisting of a few buttons to control the timing and
intensity of the microwaves. Cars provide a simple abstraction that allows us to
drive them without understanding the mechanisms for electrical motors, battery
power management, anti-lock brakes, cruise control, and so on.
Figure 4.1: Deep and shallow modules. The best modules are deep: they allow a lot of functionality to be
accessed through a simple interface. A shallow module is one with a relatively complex interface, but not
much functionality: it doesn’t hide much complexity.



4.4 Deep modules
The best modules are those that provide powerful functionality yet have simple
interfaces. I use the term deep to describe such modules. To visualize the notion
of depth, imagine that each module is represented by a rectangle, as shown in
Figure 4.1. The area of each rectangle is proportional to the functionality
implemented by the module. The top edge of a rectangle represents the module’s
interface; the length of that edge indicates the complexity of the interface. The
best modules are deep: they have a lot of functionality hidden behind a simple
interface. A deep module is a good abstraction because only a small fraction of
its internal complexity is visible to its users.
     Module depth is a way of thinking about cost versus benefit. The benefit
provided by a module is its functionality. The cost of a module (in terms of
system complexity) is its interface. A module’s interface represents the
complexity that the module imposes on the rest of the system: the smaller and
simpler the interface, the less complexity that it introduces. The best modules are
those with the greatest benefit and the least cost. Interfaces are good, but more,
or larger, interfaces are not necessarily better!
     The mechanism for file I/O provided by the Unix operating system and its
descendants, such as Linux, is a beautiful example of a deep interface. There are
only five basic system calls for I/O, with simple signatures:
    int open(const char* path, int flags, mode_t permissions);
    ssize_t read(int fd, void* buffer, size_t count);
    ssize_t write(int fd, const void* buffer, size_t count);
   off_t lseek(int fd, off_t offset, int referencePosition);
   int close(int fd);
The open system call takes a hierarchical file name such as /a/b/c and returns an
integer file descriptor, which is used to reference the open file. The other
arguments for open provide optional information such as whether the file is being
opened for reading or writing, whether a new file should be created if there is no
existing file, and access permissions for the file, if a new file is created. The read
and write system calls transfer information between buffer areas in the
application’s memory and the file; close ends the access to the file. Most files
are accessed sequentially, so that is the default; however, random access can be
achieved by invoking the lseek system call to change the current access position.
    A modern implementation of the Unix I/O interface requires hundreds of
thousands of lines of code, which address complex issues such as:

     How are files represented on disk in order to allow efficient access?
     How are directories stored, and how are hierarchical path names processed
     to find the files they refer to?
     How are permissions enforced, so that one user cannot modify or delete
     another user’s files?
     How are file accesses implemented? For example, how is functionality
     divided between interrupt handlers and background code, and how do these
     two elements communicate safely?
     What scheduling policies are used when there are concurrent accesses to
     multiple files?
     How can recently accessed file data be cached in memory in order to reduce
     the number of disk accesses?
     How can a variety of different secondary storage devices, such as disks and
     flash drives, be incorporated into a single file system?

    All of these issues, and many more, are handled by the Unix file system
implementation; they are invisible to programmers who invoke the system calls.
Implementations of the Unix I/O interface have evolved radically over the years,
but the five basic kernel calls have not changed.
    Another example of a deep module is the garbage collector in a language
such as Go or Java. This module has no interface at all; it works invisibly behind
the scenes to reclaim unused memory. Adding garbage collection to a system
actually shrinks its overall interface, since it eliminates the interface for freeing
objects. The implementation of a garbage collector is quite complex, but that
complexity is hidden from programmers.
    Deep modules such as Unix I/O and garbage collectors provide powerful
abstractions because they are easy to use, yet they hide significant
implementation complexity.


4.5 Shallow modules
On the other hand, a shallow module is one whose interface is relatively complex
in comparison to the functionality that it provides. For example, a class that
implements linked lists is shallow. It doesn’t take much code to manipulate a
linked list (inserting or deleting an element takes only a few lines), so the linked
list abstraction doesn’t hide very many details. The complexity of a linked list
interface is nearly as great as the complexity of its implementation. Shallow
classes like linked lists are sometimes unavoidable and they can still be useful,
but they don’t provide much leverage against complexity.
     Here is an extreme example of a shallow method, taken from a project in a
software design class:
   private void addNullValueForAttribute(String attribute) {
         data.put(attribute, null);
   }
From the standpoint of managing complexity, this method makes things worse,
not better. The method offers no abstraction, since all of its functionality is
visible through its interface. For example, callers probably need to know that the
attribute will be stored in the data variable. It is no simpler to think about the
interface than to think about the full implementation. If the method is
documented properly, the documentation will be longer than the method’s code.
It even takes more keystrokes to invoke the method than it would take for a caller
to manipulate the data variable directly. The method adds complexity (in the
form of a new interface for developers to learn) but provides no compensating
benefit.


                     Red Flag: Shallow Module
  A shallow module is one whose interface is complicated relative to the
  functionality it provides. Shallow modules don’t help much in the battle
  against complexity, because the benefit they provide (not having to learn
  about how they work internally) is negated by the cost of learning and using
  their interfaces. Small modules tend to be shallow.



4.6 Classitis
Unfortunately, the value of deep classes is not widely appreciated today. The
conventional wisdom in programming is that classes should be small, not deep.
Students are often taught that the most important thing in class design is to break
up larger classes into smaller ones. The same advice is often given about
methods: “Any method longer than N lines should be divided into multiple
methods” (N can be as low as 10). This approach results in large numbers of
shallow classes and methods, which add to overall system complexity.
    The extreme of the “classes should be small” approach is a syndrome I call
classitis, which stems from the mistaken view that “classes are good, so more
classes are better.” In systems suffering from classitis, developers are encouraged
to minimize the amount of functionality in each new class: if you want more
functionality, introduce more classes. Classitis may result in classes that are
individually simple, but it increases the complexity of the overall system. Small
classes don’t contribute much functionality, so there have to be a lot of them,
each with its own interface. These interfaces accumulate to create tremendous
complexity at the system level. Small classes also result in a verbose
programming style, due to the boilerplate required for each class.


4.7 Examples: Java and Unix I/O
One of the most visible examples of classitis today is the Java class library. The
Java language doesn’t require lots of small classes, but a culture of classitis
seems to have taken root in the Java programming community. For example, for
many years Java developers had to create three different objects in order to open
a file and read serialized objects from it:
   FileInputStream fileStream =
       new FileInputStream(fileName);
   BufferedInputStream bufferedStream =
       new BufferedInputStream(fileStream);
   ObjectInputStream objectStream =
       new ObjectInputStream(bufferedStream);
A FileInputStream object provides only rudimentary I/O: it is not capable of
performing buffered I/O, nor can it read or write serialized objects. The
BufferedInputStream object adds buffering to a FileInputStream, and the
ObjectInputStream adds the ability to read and write serialized objects. The first
two objects in the code above, fileStream and bufferedStream, are never used
once the file has been opened; all future operations use objectStream.
     It is particularly annoying (and error-prone) that buffering must be requested
explicitly by creating a separate BufferedInputStream object; if a developer
forgets to create this object, there will be no buffering and I/O will be slow.
Perhaps the Java developers would argue that not everyone wants to use buffering
for file I/O, so it shouldn’t be built into the base mechanism. They might argue
that it’s better to keep buffering separate, so people can choose whether or not to
use it. Providing choice is good, but interfaces should be designed to make the
common case as simple as possible (see the formula on page 6). Almost every
user of file I/O will want buffering, so it should be provided by default. For those
few situations where buffering is not desirable, the library can provide a
mechanism to disable it. Any mechanism for disabling buffering should be
cleanly separated in the interface (for example, by providing a different
constructor for FileInputStream, or through a method that disables or replaces
the buffering mechanism), so that most developers do not even need to be aware
of its existence.
     In contrast, the designers of the Unix system calls made the common case
simple. For example, they recognized that sequential I/O is most common, so
they made that the default behavior. Random access is still relatively easy to do,
using the lseek system call, but a developer doing only sequential access need
not be aware of that mechanism. If an interface has many features, but most
developers only need to be aware of a few of them, the effective complexity of
that interface is just the complexity of the commonly used features.


4.8 Conclusion
By separating the interface of a module from its implementation, we can hide the
complexity of the implementation from the rest of the system. Users of a module
need only understand the abstraction provided by its interface. The most
important issue in designing classes and other modules is to make them deep, so
that they have simple interfaces for the common use cases, yet still provide
significant functionality. This maximizes the amount of complexity that is
concealed.


   1There exist languages, mostly in the research community, where the overall behavior of a method or

function can be described formally using a specification language. The specification can be checked
automatically to ensure that it matches the implementation. An interesting question is whether such a formal
specification could replace the informal parts of an interface. My current opinion is that an interface
described in English is likely to be more intuitive and understandable for developers than one written in a
formal specification language.
Chapter 5
Information Hiding (and Leakage)

Chapter 4 argued that modules should be deep. This chapter, and the next few
that follow, discuss techniques for creating deep modules.


5.1 Information hiding
One of the most important techniques for achieving deep modules is information
hiding. This technique was first described in a classic paper by David Parnas1.
The basic idea is that each module should encapsulate a few pieces of
knowledge, which represent design decisions. The knowledge is embedded in the
module’s implementation but does not appear in its interface, so it is not visible
to other modules.
    The information hidden within a module usually consists of details about
how to implement some mechanism. Here are some examples of information that
might be hidden within a module:

     How to store information in a B-tree, and how to access it efficiently.
     How to identify the physical disk block corresponding to each logical block
     within a file.
     How to implement the TCP network protocol.
     How to schedule threads on a multi-core processor.
     How to parse JSON documents.

     The hidden information includes data structures and algorithms related to the
mechanism. It can also include lower-level details such as the size of a page, and
it can include higher-level concepts that are more abstract, such as an assumption
that most files are small.
     Information hiding reduces complexity in two ways. First, it simplifies the
interface to a module. The interface reflects a simpler, more abstract view of the
module’s functionality and hides the details; this reduces the cognitive load on
developers who use the module. For instance, a developer using a B-tree class
need not worry about the ideal fanout for nodes in the tree or how to keep the
tree balanced. Second, information hiding makes it easier to evolve the system. If
a piece of information is hidden, there are no dependencies on that information
outside the module containing the information, so a design change related to that
information will affect only the one module. For example, if the TCP protocol
changes (to introduce a new mechanism for congestion control, for instance), the
protocol’s implementation will have to be modified, but no changes should be
needed in higher-level code that uses TCP to send and receive data.
    When designing a new module, you should think carefully about what
information can be hidden in that module. If you can hide more information, you
should also be able to simplify the module’s interface, and this makes the module
deeper.
    Note: hiding variables and methods in a class by declaring them private isn’t
the same thing as information hiding. Private elements can help with information
hiding, since they make it impossible for the items to be accessed directly from
outside the class. However, information about the private items can still be
exposed through public methods such as getter and setter methods. When this
happens the nature and usage of the variables are just as exposed as if the
variables were public.
    The best form of information hiding is when information is totally hidden
within a module, so that it is irrelevant and invisible to users of the module.
However, partial information hiding also has value. For example, if a particular
feature or piece of information is only needed by a few of a class’s users, and it is
accessed through separate methods so that it isn’t visible in the most common
use cases, then that information is mostly hidden. Such information will create
fewer dependencies than information that is visible to every user of the class.


5.2 Information leakage
The opposite of information hiding is information leakage. Information leakage
occurs when a design decision is reflected in multiple modules. This creates a
dependency between the modules: any change to that design decision will require
changes to all of the involved modules. If a piece of information is reflected in
the interface for a module, then by definition it has been leaked; thus, simpler
interfaces tend to correlate with better information hiding. However, information
can be leaked even if it doesn’t appear in a module’s interface. Suppose two
classes both have knowledge of a particular file format (perhaps one class reads
files in that format and the other class writes them). Even if neither class exposes
that information in its interface, they both depend on the file format: if the format
changes, both classes will need to be modified. Back-door leakage like this is
more pernicious than leakage through an interface, because it isn’t obvious.
    Information leakage is one of the most important red flags in software
design. One of the best skills you can learn as a software designer is a high level
of sensitivity to information leakage. If you encounter information leakage
between classes, ask yourself “How can I reorganize these classes so that this
particular piece of knowledge only affects a single class?” If the affected classes
are relatively small and closely tied to the leaked information, it may make sense
to merge them into a single class. Another possible approach is to pull the
information out of all of the affected classes and create a new class that
encapsulates just that information. However, this approach will be effective only
if you can find a simple interface that abstracts away from the details; if the new
class exposes most of the knowledge through its interface, then it won’t provide
much value (you’ve simply replaced back-door leakage with leakage through an
interface).


5.3 Temporal decomposition
One common cause of information leakage is a design style I call temporal
decomposition. In temporal decomposition, the structure of a system corresponds
to the time order in which operations will occur. Consider an application that
reads a file in a particular format, modifies the contents of the file, and then
writes the file out again. With temporal decomposition, this application might be
broken into three classes: one to read the file, another to perform the
modifications, and a third to write out the new version. Both the file reading and
file writing steps have knowledge about the file format, which results in
information leakage. The solution is to combine the core mechanisms for reading
and writing files into a single class. This class will get used during both the
reading and writing phases of the application. It’s easy to fall into the trap of
temporal decomposition, because the order in which operations must occur is
often on your mind when you code. However, most design decisions manifest
themselves at several different times over the life of the application; as a result,
temporal decomposition often results in information leakage.


                 Red Flag: Information Leakage
  Information leakage occurs when the same knowledge is used in multiple
  places, such as two different classes that both understand the format of a
  particular type of file.


    Order usually does matter, so it will be reflected somewhere in the
application. However, it shouldn’t be reflected in the module structure unless that
structure is consistent with information hiding (perhaps the different stages use
totally different information). When designing modules, focus on the
knowledge that’s needed to perform each task, not the order in which tasks
occur.


5.4 Example: HTTP server
To illustrate the issues in information hiding, let’s consider the design decisions
made by students implementing the HTTP protocol in a software design course.
It’s useful to see both the things they did well and the areas where they had
problems.
     HTTP is a mechanism used by Web browsers to communicate with Web
servers. When a user clicks on a link in a Web browser or submits a form, the
browser uses HTTP to send a request over the network to a Web server. Once the
server has processed the request, it sends a response back to the browser; the
response normally contains a new Web page to display. The HTTP protocol
specifies the format of requests and responses, both of which are represented
textually. Figure 5.1 shows a sample HTTP request describing a form submission.
The students in the course were asked to implement one or more classes to make
it easy for Web servers to receive incoming HTTP requests and send responses.
                   Red Flag: Temporal Decomposition
   In temporal decomposition, execution order is reflected in the code
   structure: operations that happen at different times are in different methods
   or classes. If the same knowledge is used at different points in execution, it
   gets encoded in multiple places, resulting in information leakage.




Figure 5.1: A POST request in the HTTP protocol consists of text sent over a TCP socket. Each request
contains an initial line, a collection of headers terminated by an empty line, and an optional body. The initial
line contains the request type (POST is used for submitting form data), a URL indicating an operation
(/comments/create) and optional parameters (photo_id has the value 246), and the HTTP protocol version
used by the sender. Each header line consists of a name such as Content-Length followed by its value. For
this request, the body contains additional parameters (comment and priority).



5.5 Example: too many classes
The most common mistake made by students was to divide their code into a large
number of shallow classes, which led to information leakage between the classes.
One team used two different classes for receiving HTTP requests; the first class
read the request from the network connection into a string, and the second class
parsed the string. This is an example of a temporal decomposition (“first we read
the request, then we parse it”). Information leakage occurred because an HTTP
request can’t be read without parsing much of the message; for example, the
Content-Length header specifies the length of the request body, so the headers
must be parsed in order to compute the total request length. As a result, both
classes needed to understand most of the structure of HTTP requests, and parsing
code was duplicated in both classes. This approach also created extra complexity
for callers, who had to invoke two methods in different classes, in a particular
order, to receive a request.
    Because the classes shared so much information, it would have been better to
merge them into a single class that handles both request reading and parsing.
This provides better information hiding, since it isolates all knowledge of the
request format in one class, and it also provides a simpler interface to callers (just
one method to invoke).
    This example illustrates a general theme in software design: information
hiding can often be improved by making a class slightly larger. One reason
for doing this is to bring together all of the code related to a particular capability
(such as parsing an HTTP request), so that the resulting class contains everything
related to that capability. A second reason for increasing the size of a class is to
raise the level of the interface; for example, rather than having separate methods
for each of three steps of a computation, have a single method that performs the
entire computation. This can result in a simpler interface. Both of these benefits
apply in the example of the previous paragraph: combining the classes brings
together all of the code related to parsing an HTTP request, and it replaces two
externally-visible methods with one. The combined class is deeper than the
original classes.
    Of course, it is possible to take the notion of larger classes too far (such as a
single class for the entire application). Chapter 9 will discuss conditions under
which it makes sense to separate code into multiple smaller classes.


5.6 Example: HTTP parameter handling
After an HTTP request has been received by a server, the server needs to access
some of the information from the request. The code that handles the request in
Figure 5.1 might need to know the value of the photo_id parameter. Parameters
can be specified in the first line of the request (photo_id in Figure 5.1) or,
sometimes, in the body (comment and priority in Figure 5.1). Each parameter
has a name and a value. The values of parameters use a special encoding called
URL encoding; for example, in the value for comment in Figure 5.1, “+” is used to
represent a space character, and “%21” is used instead of “!”. In order to process
a request, the server will need the values for some of the parameters, and it will
want them in unencoded form.
    Most of the student projects made two good choices with respect to
parameter handling. First, they recognized that server applications don’t care
whether a parameter is specified in the header line or the body of the request, so
they hid this distinction from callers and merged the parameters from both
locations together. Second, they hid knowledge of URL encoding: the HTTP
parser decodes parameter values before returning them to the Web server, so that
the value of the comment parameter in Figure 5.1 will be returned as “What a cute
baby!”, not “What+a+cute+baby%21”). In both of these cases, information
hiding resulted in simpler APIs for the code using the HTTP module.
    However, most of the students used an interface for returning parameters that
was too shallow, and this resulted in lost opportunities for information hiding.
Most projects used an object of type HTTPRequest to hold the parsed HTTP
request, and the HTTPRequest class had a single method like the following one to
return parameters:
   public Map<String, String> getParams() {
     return this.params;
   }
Rather than returning a single parameter, the method returns a reference to the
Map used internally to store all of the parameters. This method is shallow, and it
exposes the internal representation used by the HTTPRequest class to store
parameters. Any change to that representation will result in a change to the
interface, which will require modifications to all callers. When implementations
are modified, the changes often involve changes in the representation of key data
structures (to improve performance, for example). Thus, it’s important to avoid
exposing internal data structures as much as possible. This approach also makes
more work for callers: a caller must first invoke getParams, then it must call
another method to retrieve a specific parameter from the Map. Finally, callers
must realize that they should not modify the Map returned by getParams, since
that will affect the internal state of the HTTPRequest.
    Here is a better interface for retrieving parameter values:
   public String getParameter(String name) { ... }
   public int getIntParameter(String name) { ... }
getParameter returns a parameter value as a string. It provides a slightly deeper
interface than getParams above; more importantly, it hides the internal
representation of parameters. getIntParameter converts the value of a parameter
from its string form in the HTTP request to an integer (e.g., the photo_id
parameter in Figure 5.1). This saves the caller from having to request string-to-
integer conversion separately, and hides that mechanism from the caller.
Additional methods for other data types, such as getDoubleParameter, could be
defined if needed. (All of these methods will throw exceptions if the desired
parameter doesn’t exist, or if it can’t be converted to the requested type; the
exception declarations have been omitted in the code above).


5.7 Example: defaults in HTTP responses
The HTTP projects also had to provide support for generating HTTP responses.
The most common mistake students made in this area was inadequate defaults.
Each HTTP response must specify an HTTP protocol version; one team required
callers to specify this version explicitly when creating a response object.
However, the response version must correspond to that in the request object, and
the request must already be passed as an argument when sending the response (it
indicates where to send the response). Thus, it makes more sense for the HTTP
classes to provide the response version automatically. The caller is unlikely to
know what version to specify, and if the caller does specify a value, it probably
results in information leakage between the HTTP library and the caller. HTTP
responses also include a Date header specifying the time when the response was
sent; the HTTP library should provide a sensible default for this as well.
    Defaults illustrate the principle that interfaces should be designed to make
the common case as simple as possible. They are also an example of partial
information hiding: in the normal case, the caller need not be aware of the
existence of the defaulted item. In the rare cases where a caller needs to override
a default, it will have to know about the value, and it can invoke a special method
to modify it.
    Whenever possible, classes should “do the right thing” without being
explicitly asked. Defaults are an example of this. The Java I/O example on page
26 illustrates this point in a negative way. Buffering in file I/O is so universally
desirable that noone should ever have to ask explicitly for it, or even be aware of
its existence; the I/O classes should do the right thing and provide it
automatically. The best features are the ones you get without even knowing they
exist.
                       Red Flag: Overexposure
  If the API for a commonly used feature forces users to learn about other
  features that are rarely used, this increases the cognitive load on users who
  don’t need the rarely used features.



5.8 Information hiding within a class
The examples in this chapter focused on information hiding as it relates to the
externally visible APIs for classes, but information hiding can also be applied at
other levels in the system, such as within a class. Try to design the private
methods within a class so that each method encapsulates some information or
capability and hides it from the rest of the class. In addition, try to minimize the
number of places where each instance variable is used. Some variables may need
to be accessed widely across the class, but others may be needed in only a few
places; if you can reduce the number of places where a variable is used, you will
eliminate dependencies within the class and reduce its complexity.


5.9 Taking it too far
Information hiding only makes sense when the information being hidden is not
needed outside its module. If the information is needed outside the module, then
you must not hide it. Suppose that the performance of a module is affected by
certain configuration parameters, and that different uses of the module will
require different settings of the parameters. In this case it is important that the
parameters are exposed in the interface of the module, so that they can be tuned
appropriately. As a software designer, your goal should be to minimize the
amount of information needed outside a module; for example, if a module can
automatically adjust its configuration, that is better than exposing configuration
parameters. But, it’s important to recognize which information is needed outside
a module and make sure it is exposed.
5.10 Conclusion
Information hiding and deep modules are closely related. If a module hides a lot
of information, that tends to increase the amount of functionality provided by the
module while also reducing its interface. This makes the module deeper.
Conversely, if a module doesn’t hide much information, then either it doesn’t
have much functionality, or it has a complex interface; either way, the module is
shallow.
    When decomposing a system into modules, try not to be influenced by the
order in which operations will occur at runtime; that will lead you down the path
of temporal decomposition, which will result in information leakage and shallow
modules. Instead, think about the different pieces of knowledge that are needed
to carry out the tasks of your application, and design each module to encapsulate
one or a few of those pieces of knowledge. This will produce a clean and simple
design with deep modules.


   1David Parnas, “On the Criteria to be Used in Decomposing Systems into Modules,” Communications of

the ACM, December 1972.
Chapter 6
General-Purpose Modules are Deeper

The process of teaching my software design course, in which I’m constantly
trying to identify the causes of complexity in student code, has changed my
thinking about software design in several ways. The most important of these has
to do with generality versus specialization. I have found over and over that
specialization leads to complexity; I now think that over-specialization may be
the single greatest cause of complexity in software. Conversely, code that is more
general-purpose is simpler, cleaner, and easier to understand.
    This principle applies at many different levels in software design. When
designing modules such as classes or methods, one of the best ways to produce a
deep API is to make it general-purpose (general-purpose APIs result in more
information hiding). When writing detailed code, one of the most effective ways
to simplify the code is by eliminating special cases, so that the common-case
code handles the edge cases as well. Eliminating special cases can also make
code more efficient, as we shall see in Chapter 20.
    This chapter discusses the problems caused by specialization and the benefits
of generality. Specialization cannot be completely eliminated, so the chapter also
offers guidelines on how to separate special-purpose code from general-purpose
code.


6.1 Make classes somewhat general-purpose
One of the most common decisions that you will face when designing a new
class is whether to implement it in a general-purpose or special-purpose fashion.
Some might argue that you should take a general-purpose approach, in which
you implement a mechanism that can be used to address a broad range of
problems, not just the ones that are important today. In this case, the new
mechanism may find unanticipated uses in the future, thereby saving time. The
general-purpose approach seems consistent with the investment mindset
discussed in Chapter 3, where you spend a bit more time up front to save time
later on.
     On the other hand, we know that it’s hard to predict the future needs of a
software system, so a general-purpose solution might include facilities that are
never actually needed. Furthermore, if you implement something that is too
general-purpose, it might not do a good job of solving the particular problem you
have today. As a result, some might argue that it’s better to focus on today’s
needs, building just what you know you need, and specializing it for the way you
plan to use it today. If you take the special-purpose approach and discover
additional uses later, you can always refactor it to make it general-purpose. The
special-purpose approach seems consistent with an incremental approach to
software development.
     When I first started teaching my software design course I leaned towards the
second approach (make it special-purpose to begin with), but after teaching the
course a few times I changed my mind. In reviewing student projects I noticed
that general-purpose classes were almost always better than special-purpose
alternatives. What particularly surprised me is that general-purpose interfaces are
simpler and deeper than special-purpose ones, and they result in less code in the
implementation. It turns out that even if you use a class in a special-purpose way,
it’s less work to build it in a general-purpose way. And, the general-purpose
approach can save you even more time in the future, if you reuse the class for
other purposes. But general-purpose is still better even if you don’t reuse the
class.
     In my experience, the sweet spot is to implement new modules in a somewhat
general-purpose fashion. The phrase “somewhat general-purpose” means that
the module’s functionality should reflect your current needs, but its interface
should not. Instead, the interface should be general enough to support multiple
uses. The interface should be easy to use for today’s needs without being tied
specifically to them. The word “somewhat” is important: don’t get carried away
and build something so general-purpose that it is difficult to use for your current
needs.


6.2 Example: storing text for an editor
Let’s consider an example from a software design class in which students were
asked to build simple a GUI text editor. The editor had to display a file and allow
users to point, click, and type to edit the file. It also had to support multiple
simultaneous views of the same file in different windows, and it had to support
multi-level undo and redo for modifications to the file.
    Each of the student projects included a class that managed the underlying text
of the file. The text classes typically provided methods for loading a file into
memory, reading and modifying the text of the file, and writing the modified text
back to a file. Many of the student teams implemented special-purpose APIs for
the text class.
    They knew that the class was going to be used in an interactive editor, so they
thought about the features that the editor had to provide and tailored the API of
the text class to those specific features. For example, if a user of the editor typed
the backspace key, the editor deleted the character immediately to the left of the
cursor; if the user typed the delete key, the editor deleted the character
immediately to the right of the cursor. Knowing this, some of the teams created
one method in the text class to support each of these specific features:
   void backspace(Cursor cursor);
   void delete(Cursor cursor);
Each of these methods takes the cursor position as its argument; a special type
Cursor represents this position. The editor also had to support a selection that
could be copied or deleted. The students handled this by defining a Selection
class and passing an object of this class to the text class during deletions:
   void deleteSelection(Selection selection);
The students probably thought that it would be easier to implement the user
interface if the methods of the text class corresponded to the features visible to
users. In reality, however, this specialization provided little benefit for the user
interface code, and it created a high cognitive load for developers working on
either the user interface or the text class. The text class ended up with a large
number of shallow methods, each of which was only suitable for one user
interface operation. Many of the methods, such as delete, were only invoked in a
single place. As a result, a developer working on the user interface had to learn
about a large number of methods for the text class.
    This approach created information leakage between the user interface and the
text class. Abstractions related to the user interface, such as the selection or the
backspace key, were reflected in the text class; this increased the cognitive load
for developers working on the text class. Each new user interface operation
required a new method to be defined in the text class, so a developer working on
the user interface was likely to end up working on the text class as well. One of
the goals in class design is to allow each class to be developed independently, but
the specialized approach tied the user interface and text classes together.


6.3 A more general-purpose API
A better approach is to make the text class more generic. Its API should be
defined only in terms of basic text features, without reflecting the higher-level
operations that will be implemented with it. For example, only two methods are
needed for modifying text:
   void insert(Position position, String newText);
   void delete(Position start, Position end);
The first method inserts an arbitrary string at an arbitrary position within the
text, and the second method deletes all of the characters at positions greater than
or equal to start but less than end. This API also uses a more generic type
Position instead of Cursor, which reflects a specific user interface. The text
class should also provide general-purpose facilities for manipulating positions
within the text, such as the following:
   Position changePosition(Position position, int numChars);
This method returns a new position that is a given number of characters away
from a given position. If the numChars argument is positive, the new position is
later in the file than position; if numChars is negative, the new position is before
position. The method automatically skips to the next or previous line when
necessary. With these methods, the delete key can be implemented with the
following code (assuming the cursor variable holds the current cursor position):
   text.delete(cursor, text.changePosition(cursor, 1));
Similarly, the backspace key can be implemented as follows:
   text.delete(text.changePosition(cursor, -1), cursor);
With the general-purpose text API, the code to implement user interface
functions such as delete and backspace is a bit longer than with the original
approach using a specialized text API. However, the new code is more obvious
than the old code. A developer working in the user interface module probably
cares about which characters are deleted by the backspace key. With the new
code, this is obvious. With the old code, the developer had to go to the text class
and read the documentation and/or code of the backspace method to verify the
behavior. Furthermore, the general-purpose approach has less code overall than
the specialized approach, since it replaces a large number of special-purpose
methods in the text class with a smaller number of general-purpose ones.
    A text class implemented with the general-purpose interface could potentially
be used for other purposes besides an interactive editor. As one example, suppose
you were building an application that modified a specified file by replacing all
occurrences of a particular string with another string. Methods from the
specialized text class, such as backspace and delete, would have little value for
this application. However, the general-purpose text class would already have
most of the functionality needed for the new application. All that is missing is a
method to search for the next occurrence of a given string, such as this:
   Position findNext(Position start, String string);
Of course, an interactive text editor is likely to have a mechanism for searching
and replacing, in which case the text class would already include this method.


6.4 Generality leads to better information hiding
The general-purpose approach provides a cleaner separation between the text and
user interface classes, which results in better information hiding. The text class
need not be aware of specifics of the user interface, such as how the backspace
key is handled; these details are now encapsulated in the user interface class.
New user interface features can be added without creating new supporting
functions in the text class. The general-purpose interface also reduces cognitive
load: a developer working on the user interface only needs to learn a few simple
methods, which can be reused for a variety of purposes.
    The backspace method in the original version of the text class was a false
abstraction. It purported to hide information about which characters are deleted,
but the user interface module really needs to know this; user interface developers
are likely to read the code of the backspace method in order to confirm its
precise behavior. Putting the method in the text class just makes it harder for user
interface developers to get the information they need. One of the most important
elements of software design is determining who needs to know what, and when.
When the details are important, it is better to make them explicit and as obvious
as possible, such as the revised implementation of the backspace operation.
Hiding this information behind an interface just creates obscurity.
6.5 Questions to ask yourself
It is easier to recognize a clean general-purpose class design than it is to create
one. Here are some questions you can ask yourself, which will help you to find
the right balance between general-purpose and special-purpose for an interface.

What is the simplest interface that will cover all my current needs? If you
reduce the number of methods in an API without reducing its overall capabilities,
then you are probably creating more general-purpose methods. The special-
purpose text API had at least three methods for deleting text: backspace, delete,
and deleteSelection. The more general-purpose API had only one method for
deleting text, which served all three purposes. Reducing the number of methods
makes sense only as long as the API for each individual method stays simple; if
you have to introduce lots of additional arguments in order to reduce the number
of methods, then you may not really be simplifying things.

In how many situations will this method be used? If a method is designed for
one particular use, such as the backspace method, that is a red flag that it may be
too special-purpose. See if you can replace several special-purpose methods with
a single general-purpose method.

Is this API easy to use for my current needs? This question can help you to
determine when you have gone too far in making an API simple and general-
purpose. If you have to write a lot of additional code to use a class for your
current purpose, that’s a red flag that the interface doesn’t provide the right
functionality. For example, one approach for the text class would be to design it
around single-character operations: insert inserts a single character and delete
deletes a single character. This API is both simple and general-purpose.
However, it would not be particularly easy to use for a text editor: higher-level
code would contain lots of loops to insert or delete ranges of characters. The
single-character approach would also be inefficient for large operations. Thus it’s
better for the text class to have built-in support for operations on ranges of
characters.


6.6 Push specialization upwards (and
       downwards!)
Most software systems must inevitably have some code that is specialized. For
example, applications provide specific features for their users; these are often
highly specialized. Thus it isn’t usually possible to eliminate specialization
altogether. However, specialized code should be cleanly separated from general-
purpose code. This can be done by pushing the specialized code either up or
down in the software stack.
    One way to separate specialized code is to push it upwards. The top-level
classes of an application, which provide specific features, will necessarily be
specialized for those features. But this specialization need not percolate down
into the lower-level classes that are used to implement the features. We saw this
in the editor example earlier in this chapter. The original student implementation
leaked specialized user-interface details such as the behavior of the backspace
key down into the implementation of the text class. The improved text API
pushed all of the specialization upwards into the user interface code, leaving only
general-purpose code in the text class.
    Sometimes the best approach is to push specialization downwards. One
example of this is device drivers. An operating system typically must support
hundreds or thousands of different device types of devices, such as different
kinds of secondary storage devices. Each of these device types has its own
specialized command set. In order to prevent specialized device characteristics
from leaking into the main operating system code, operating systems define an
interface with general-purpose operations that any secondary storage device must
implement, such as “read a block” and “write a block”. For each different device,
a device driver module implements the general-purpose interface using the
specialized features of that particular device. This approach pushes specialization
down into the device drivers, so that the core of the operating system can be
written without any knowledge of specific device characteristics. This approach
also makes it easy to add new devices: if a device has enough features to
implement the device driver interface, it can be added to the system with no
changes to the main operating system.


6.7 Example: editor undo mechanism
In the GUI editor project, one of the requirements was to support multi-level
undo/redo, not just for changes to the text itself, but also for changes in the
selection, insertion cursor, and view. For example, if a user selects some text,
deletes it, scrolls to a different place in the file, and then invokes undo, the editor
must restore its state to what it was just before the deletion. This includes
restoring the deleted text, selecting it again, and also making the selected text
visible in the window.
    Some of the student projects implemented the entire undo mechanism as part
of the text class. The text class maintained a list of all the undoable changes. It
automatically added entries to this list whenever the text was changed. For
changes to the selection, insertion cursor, and view, the user interface code
invoked additional methods in the text class, which then added entries for those
changes to the undo list. When undo or redo was requested by the user, the user
interface code invoked a method in the text class, which then processed the
entries in the undo list. For entries related to text, it updated the internals of the
text class; for entries related to other things, such as the selection, the text class
called back to the user interface code to carry out the undo or redo.
    This approach resulted in an awkward set of features in the text class. The
core of undo/redo consists of a general-purpose mechanism for managing a list
of actions that have been executed and stepping through them during undo and
redo operations. The core was located in the text class along with special-
purpose handlers that implemented undo and redo for specific things such as text
and the selection. The special-purpose undo handlers for the selection and the
cursor had nothing to do with anything else in the text class; they resulted in
information leakage between the text class and the user interface, as well as extra
methods in each module to pass undo information back and forth. If a new sort
of undoable entity were added to the system in the future, it would require
changes to the text class, including new methods specific to that entity. In
addition, the general-purpose undo core had little to do with the general-purpose
text facilities in the class.
    These problems can be solved by extracting the general-purpose core of the
undo/redo mechanism and placing it in a separate class:
    public class History {
       public interface Action {
          public void redo();
          public void undo();
       }
       History() {...}


       void addAction(Action action) {...}
       void addFence() {...}

       void undo() {...}
          void redo() {...}
       }
In this design, the History class manages a collection of objects that implement
the interface History.Action. Each History.Action describes a single operation,
such as a text insertion or a change in the cursor location, and it provides
methods that can undo or redo the operation. The History class knows nothing
about the information stored in the actions or how they implement their undo and
redo methods. History maintains a history list describing all of the actions
executed over the lifetime of an application, and it provides undo and redo
methods that walk backwards and forwards through the list in response to user-
requested undos and redos, calling undo and redo methods in the
History.Actions.
    History.Actions are special-purpose objects: each one understands a
particular kind of undoable operation. They are implemented outside the History
class, in modules that understand particular kinds of undoable actions. The text
class might implement UndoableInsert and UndoableDelete objects to describe
text insertions and deletions. Whenever it inserts text, the text class creates a new
UndoableInsert object describing the insertion and invokes History.addAction
to add it to the history list. The editor’s user interface code might create
UndoableSelection and UndoableCursor objects that describe changes to the
selection and insertion cursor.
    The History class also allows actions to be grouped so that, for example, a
single undo request from the user can restore deleted text, reselect the deleted
text, and reposition the insertion cursor. To implement grouping the History
class uses fences, which are markers placed in the history list to separate groups
of related actions. Each call to History.redo walks backwards through the
history list, undoing actions until it reaches the next fence. The placement of
fences is determined by higher-level code by invoking History.addFence.
    This approach divides the functionality of undo into three categories, each of
which is implemented in a different place:
     A general-purpose mechanism for managing and grouping actions and
     invoking undo/redo operations (implemented by the History class).
     The specifics of particular actions (implemented by a variety of classes,
     each of which understands a small number of action types).
     The policy for grouping actions (implemented by high-level user interface
     code to provide the right overall application behavior).

    Each of these categories can be implemented without any understanding of
the other categories. The History class does not know what kind of actions are
being undone; it could be used in a variety of applications. Each action class
understands only a single kind of action, and neither the History class nor the
action classes needs to be aware of the policy for grouping actions.
    The key design decision was the one that separated the general-purpose part
of the undo mechanism from the special-purpose parts, creating a separate class
for the general-purpose part and pushing the special-purpose parts down into
subclasses of History.Action. Once that was done, the rest of the design fell out
naturally.
    Note: the suggestion to separate general-purpose code from special-purpose
code refers to code related to a particular mechanism. For example, special-
purpose undo code (such as code to undo a text insertion) should be separated
from general-purpose undo code (such as code to manage the history list).
However, it may make sense to combine special-purpose code for one
mechanism with general-purpose code for another. The text class is an example
of this: it implements a general-purpose mechanism for managing text, but it
includes special-purpose code related to undoing. The undo code is special-
purpose because it only handles undo operations for text modifications. It doesn’t
make sense to combine this code with the general-purpose undo infrastructure in
the History class, but it does make sense to put it in the text class, since it is
closely related to other text functions.


6.8 Eliminate special cases in code
Up until this point I have been discussing specialization in the context of class
and method design. Another form of specialization occurs in the code for method
bodies, in the form of special cases. Special cases can result in code that is
riddled with if statements, which make the code hard to understand and are
prone to bugs. Thus, special cases should be eliminated wherever possible. The
best way to do this is by designing the normal case in a way that automatically
handles the edge conditions without any extra code.
    In the text editor project, students had to implement a mechanism for
selecting text and copying or deleting the selection. Most students introduced a
state variable in their selection implementation to indicate whether or not the
selection exists. They probably chose this approach because there are times when
no selection is visible on the screen, so it seemed natural to represent this notion
in the implementation. However, this approach resulted in numerous checks to
detect the “no selection” condition and handle it specially.
    The selection handling code can be simplified by eliminating the “no
selection” special case, so that the selection always exists. When there is no
selection visible on the screen, it can be represented internally with an empty
selection, whose starting and ending positions are the same. With this approach,
the selection management code can be written without any checks for “no
selection”. When copying the selection, if the selection is empty then 0 bytes will
be inserted at the new location; if implemented correctly, there will be no need to
check for 0 bytes as a special case. Similarly, it should be possible to design the
code for deleting the selection so that the empty case is handled without any
special-case checks. Consider a selection all on a single line. To delete the
selection, extract the portion of the line preceding the selection and concatenate
it with the portion of the line following the selection to form the new line. If the
selection is empty, this approach will regenerate the original line.
    Chapter 10 will discuss exceptions, which create many more special cases,
and how to reduce the number of places where they must be handled.


6.9 Conclusion
Unnecessary specialization, whether in the form of special-purpose classes and
methods or special cases in code, is a significant contributor to software
complexity. Specialization can’t be eliminated completely, but with good design
you should be able to reduce it significantly and separate specialized code from
general-purpose code. This will result in deeper classes, better information
hiding, and simpler and more obvious code.
Chapter 7
Different Layer, Different Abstraction

Software systems are composed in layers, where higher layers use the facilities
provided by lower layers. In a well-designed system, each layer provides a
different abstraction from the layers above and below it; if you follow a single
operation as it moves up and down through layers by invoking methods, the
abstractions change with each method call. For example:

    In a file system, the uppermost layer implements a file abstraction. A file
    consists of a variable-length array of bytes, which can be updated by
    reading and writing variable-length byte ranges. The next lower layer in the
    file system implements a cache in memory of fixed-size disk blocks; callers
    can assume that frequently used blocks will stay in memory where they can
    be accessed quickly. The lowest layer consists of device drivers, which move
    blocks between secondary storage devices and memory.
    In a network transport protocol such as TCP, the abstraction provided by the
    topmost layer is a stream of bytes delivered reliably from one machine to
    another. This level is built on a lower level that transmits packets of bounded
    size between machines on a best-effort basis: most packets will be delivered
    successfully, but some packets may be lost or delivered out of order.

    If a system contains adjacent layers with similar abstractions, this is a red
flag that suggests a problem with the class decomposition. This chapter discusses
situations where this happens, the problems that result, and how to refactor to
eliminate the problems.


7.1 Pass-through methods
When adjacent layers have similar abstractions, the problem often manifests
itself in the form of pass-through methods. A pass-through method is one that
does little except invoke another method, whose signature is similar or identical
to that of the calling method. For example, a student project implementing a GUI
text editor contained a class consisting almost entirely of pass-through methods.
Here is an extract from that class:
   public class TextDocument ... {
      private TextArea textArea;
      private TextDocumentListener listener;
      ...
      public Character getLastTypedCharacter() {
          return textArea.getLastTypedCharacter();
      }
      public int getCursorOffset() {
          return textArea.getCursorOffset();
      }
      public void insertString(String textToInsert,
             int offset) {
          textArea.insertString(textToInsert, offset);
      }
      public void willInsertString(String stringToInsert,
             int offset) {
          if (listener != null) {
             listener.willInsertString(this, stringToInsert, offset);
          }
      }
      ...
   }




                Red Flag: Pass-Through Method
  A pass-through method is one that does nothing except pass its arguments
  to another method, usually with the same API as the pass-through method.
  This typically indicates that there is not a clean division of responsibility
  between the classes.


13 of the 15 public methods in that class were pass-through methods.
    Pass-through methods make classes shallower: they increase the interface
complexity of the class, which adds complexity, but they don’t increase the total
functionality of the system. Of the four methods above, only the last one has any
functionality, and even there it is trivial: the method checks the validity of one
variable. Pass-through methods also create dependencies between classes: if the
signature changes for the insertString method in TextArea, then the
insertString method in TextDocument will have to change to match.
    Pass-through methods indicate that there is confusion over the division of
responsibility between classes. In the example above, the TextDocument class
offers an insertString method, but the functionality for inserting text is
implemented entirely in TextArea. This is usually a bad idea: the interface to a
piece of functionality should be in the same class that implements the
functionality. When you see pass-through methods from one class to another,
consider the two classes and ask yourself “Exactly which features and
abstractions is each of these classes responsible for?” You will probably notice
that there is an overlap in responsibility between the classes.
    The solution is to refactor the classes so that each class has a distinct and
coherent set of responsibilities. Figure 7.1 illustrates several ways to do this. One
approach, shown in Figure 7.1(b), is to expose the lower level class directly to the
callers of the higher level class, removing all responsibility for the feature from
the higher level class. Another approach is to redistribute the functionality
between the classes, as in Figure 7.1(c). Finally, if the classes can’t be
disentangled, the best solution may be to merge them as in Figure 7.1(d).
    In the example above, there were three classes with intertwined
responsibilities: TextDocument, TextArea, and TextDocumentListener. The
student eliminated the pass-through methods by moving methods between
classes and collapsing the three classes into just two, whose responsibilities were
more clearly differentiated.


7.2 When is interface duplication OK?
Having methods with the same signature is not always bad. The important thing
is that each new method should contribute significant functionality. Pass-through
methods are bad because they contribute no new functionality.
     One example where it’s useful for a method to call another method with the
same signature is a dispatcher. A dispatcher is a method that uses its arguments
to select one of several other methods to invoke; then it passes most or all of its
arguments to the chosen method. The signature for the dispatcher is often the
same as the signature for the methods that it calls. Even so, the dispatcher
provides useful functionality: it chooses which of several other methods should
carry out each task.




Figure 7.1: Pass-through methods. In (a), class C1 contains three pass-through methods, which do nothing
but invoke methods with the same signature in C2 (each symbol represents a particular method signature).
The pass-through methods can be eliminated by having C1’s callers invoke C2 directly as in (b), by
redistributing functionality between C1 and C2 to avoid calls between the classes as in (c), or by combining
the classes as in (d).

     For example, when a Web server receives an incoming HTTP request from a
Web browser, it invokes a dispatcher that examines the URL in the incoming
request and selects a specific method to handle the request. Some URLs might be
handled by returning the contents of a file on disk; others might be handled by
invoking a procedure in a language such as PHP or JavaScript. The dispatch
process can be quite intricate, and is usually driven by a set of rules that are
matched against the incoming URL.
     It is fine for several methods to have the same signature as long as each of
them provides useful and distinct functionality. The methods invoked by a
dispatcher have this property. Another example is interfaces with multiple
implementations, such as disk drivers in an operating system. Each driver
provides support for a different kind of disk, but they all have the same interface.
When several methods provide different implementations of the same interface,
it reduces cognitive load. Once you have worked with one of these methods, it’s
easier to work with the others, since you don’t need to learn a new interface.
Methods like this are usually in the same layer and they don’t invoke each other.


7.3 Decorators
The decorator design pattern (also known as a “wrapper”) is one that encourages
API duplication across layers. A decorator object takes an existing object and
extends its functionality; it provides an API similar or identical to the underlying
object, and its methods invoke the methods of the underlying object. In the Java
I/O example from Chapter 4, the BufferedInputStream class is a decorator: given
an InputStream object, it provides the same API but introduces buffering. For
example, when its read method is invoked to read a single character, it invokes
read on the underlying InputStream to read a much larger block, and saves the
extra characters to satisfy future read calls. Another example occurs in
windowing systems: a Window class implements a simple form of window that is
not scrollable, and a ScrollableWindow class decorates the Window class by
adding horizontal and vertical scrollbars.
    The motivation for decorators is to separate special-purpose extensions of a
class from a more generic core. However, decorator classes tend to be shallow:
they introduce a large amount of boilerplate for a small amount of new
functionality. Decorator classes often contain many pass-through methods. It’s
easy to overuse the decorator pattern, creating a new class for every small new
feature. This results in an explosion of shallow classes, such as the Java I/O
example.
    Before creating a decorator class, consider alternatives such as the following:

     Could you add the new functionality directly to the underlying class, rather
     than creating a decorator class? This makes sense if the new functionality is
     relatively general-purpose, or if it is logically related to the underlying class,
     or if most uses of the underlying class will also use the new functionality.
     For example, virtually everyone who creates a Java InputStream will also
     create a BufferedInputStream, and buffering is a natural part of I/O, so
     these classes should have been combined.
     If the new functionality is specialized for a particular use case, would it
     make sense to merge it with the use case, rather than creating a separate
     class?
     Could you merge the new functionality with an existing decorator, rather
     than creating a new decorator? This would result in a single deeper
     decorator class rather than multiple shallow ones.
     Finally, ask yourself whether the new functionality really needs to wrap the
     existing functionality: could you implement it as a stand-alone class that is
     independent of the base class? In the windowing example, the scrollbars
     could probably be implemented separately from the main window, without
     wrapping all of its existing functionality.

    There are occasionally situations where wrappers make sense. One example
is when a system uses an external class whose interface cannot be modified, but
the class must conform to a different interface in the application where it is being
used. In this case, a wrapper class can be used to translate between the interfaces.
However, situations like this are rare; there is usually a better alternative than
using a wrapper class.


7.4 Interface versus implementation
Another application of the “different layer, different abstraction” rule is that the
interface of a class should normally be different from its implementation: the
representations used internally should be different from the abstractions that
appear in the interface. If the two have similar abstractions, then the class
probably isn’t very deep. For example, in the text editor project discussed in
Chapter 6, most of the teams implemented the text module in terms of lines of
text, with each line stored separately. Some of the teams also designed the APIs
for the text class around lines, with methods such as getLine and putLine.
However, this made the text class shallow and awkward to use. In the higher-level
user interface code, it’s common to insert text in the middle of a line (e.g., when
the user is typing) or to delete a range of text that spans lines. With a line-
oriented API for the text class, callers were forced to split and join lines to
implement the user-interface operations. This code was nontrivial and it was
duplicated and scattered across the implementation of the user interface.
    The text classes were much easier to use when they provided a character-
oriented interface, such as an insert method that inserts an arbitrary string of
text (which may include newlines) at an arbitrary position in the text and a
delete method that deletes the text between two arbitrary positions in the text.
