Figure 4.1: Deep and shallow modules. The best modules are deep: they allow a lot of functionality to be
accessed through a simple interface. A shallow module is one with a relatively complex interface, but not
much functionality: it doesn’t hide much complexity.



4.4 Deep modules
The best modules are those that provide powerful functionality yet have simple
interfaces. I use the term deep to describe such modules. To visualize the notion
of depth, imagine that each module is represented by a rectangle, as shown in
Figure 4.1. The area of each rectangle is proportional to the functionality
implemented by the module. The top edge of a rectangle represents the module’s
interface; the length of that edge indicates the complexity of the interface. The
best modules are deep: they have a lot of functionality hidden behind a simple
interface. A deep module is a good abstraction because only a small fraction of
its internal complexity is visible to its users.
     Module depth is a way of thinking about cost versus benefit. The benefit
provided by a module is its functionality. The cost of a module (in terms of
system complexity) is its interface. A module’s interface represents the
complexity that the module imposes on the rest of the system: the smaller and
simpler the interface, the less complexity that it introduces. The best modules are
those with the greatest benefit and the least cost. Interfaces are good, but more,
or larger, interfaces are not necessarily better!
     The mechanism for file I/O provided by the Unix operating system and its
descendants, such as Linux, is a beautiful example of a deep interface. There are
only five basic system calls for I/O, with simple signatures:
    int open(const char* path, int flags, mode_t permissions);
    ssize_t read(int fd, void* buffer, size_t count);
    ssize_t write(int fd, const void* buffer, size_t count);
   off_t lseek(int fd, off_t offset, int referencePosition);
   int close(int fd);
The open system call takes a hierarchical file name such as /a/b/c and returns an
integer file descriptor, which is used to reference the open file. The other
arguments for open provide optional information such as whether the file is being
opened for reading or writing, whether a new file should be created if there is no
existing file, and access permissions for the file, if a new file is created. The read
and write system calls transfer information between buffer areas in the
application’s memory and the file; close ends the access to the file. Most files
are accessed sequentially, so that is the default; however, random access can be
achieved by invoking the lseek system call to change the current access position.
    A modern implementation of the Unix I/O interface requires hundreds of
thousands of lines of code, which address complex issues such as:

     How are files represented on disk in order to allow efficient access?
     How are directories stored, and how are hierarchical path names processed
     to find the files they refer to?
     How are permissions enforced, so that one user cannot modify or delete
     another user’s files?
     How are file accesses implemented? For example, how is functionality
     divided between interrupt handlers and background code, and how do these
     two elements communicate safely?
     What scheduling policies are used when there are concurrent accesses to
     multiple files?
     How can recently accessed file data be cached in memory in order to reduce
     the number of disk accesses?
     How can a variety of different secondary storage devices, such as disks and
     flash drives, be incorporated into a single file system?

    All of these issues, and many more, are handled by the Unix file system
implementation; they are invisible to programmers who invoke the system calls.
Implementations of the Unix I/O interface have evolved radically over the years,
but the five basic kernel calls have not changed.
    Another example of a deep module is the garbage collector in a language
such as Go or Java. This module has no interface at all; it works invisibly behind
the scenes to reclaim unused memory. Adding garbage collection to a system
actually shrinks its overall interface, since it eliminates the interface for freeing
objects. The implementation of a garbage collector is quite complex, but that
complexity is hidden from programmers.
    Deep modules such as Unix I/O and garbage collectors provide powerful
abstractions because they are easy to use, yet they hide significant
implementation complexity.


4.5 Shallow modules
On the other hand, a shallow module is one whose interface is relatively complex
in comparison to the functionality that it provides. For example, a class that
implements linked lists is shallow. It doesn’t take much code to manipulate a
linked list (inserting or deleting an element takes only a few lines), so the linked
list abstraction doesn’t hide very many details. The complexity of a linked list
interface is nearly as great as the complexity of its implementation. Shallow
classes like linked lists are sometimes unavoidable and they can still be useful,
but they don’t provide much leverage against complexity.
     Here is an extreme example of a shallow method, taken from a project in a
software design class:
   private void addNullValueForAttribute(String attribute) {
         data.put(attribute, null);
   }
From the standpoint of managing complexity, this method makes things worse,
not better. The method offers no abstraction, since all of its functionality is
visible through its interface. For example, callers probably need to know that the
attribute will be stored in the data variable. It is no simpler to think about the
interface than to think about the full implementation. If the method is
documented properly, the documentation will be longer than the method’s code.
It even takes more keystrokes to invoke the method than it would take for a caller
to manipulate the data variable directly. The method adds complexity (in the
form of a new interface for developers to learn) but provides no compensating
benefit.


                     Red Flag: Shallow Module
  A shallow module is one whose interface is complicated relative to the
  functionality it provides. Shallow modules don’t help much in the battle
  against complexity, because the benefit they provide (not having to learn
  about how they work internally) is negated by the cost of learning and using
  their interfaces. Small modules tend to be shallow.



4.6 Classitis
Unfortunately, the value of deep classes is not widely appreciated today. The
conventional wisdom in programming is that classes should be small, not deep.
Students are often taught that the most important thing in class design is to break
up larger classes into smaller ones. The same advice is often given about
methods: “Any method longer than N lines should be divided into multiple
methods” (N can be as low as 10). This approach results in large numbers of
shallow classes and methods, which add to overall system complexity.
    The extreme of the “classes should be small” approach is a syndrome I call
classitis, which stems from the mistaken view that “classes are good, so more
classes are better.” In systems suffering from classitis, developers are encouraged
to minimize the amount of functionality in each new class: if you want more
functionality, introduce more classes. Classitis may result in classes that are
individually simple, but it increases the complexity of the overall system. Small
classes don’t contribute much functionality, so there have to be a lot of them,
each with its own interface. These interfaces accumulate to create tremendous
complexity at the system level. Small classes also result in a verbose
programming style, due to the boilerplate required for each class.


4.7 Examples: Java and Unix I/O
One of the most visible examples of classitis today is the Java class library. The
Java language doesn’t require lots of small classes, but a culture of classitis
seems to have taken root in the Java programming community. For example, for
many years Java developers had to create three different objects in order to open
a file and read serialized objects from it:
   FileInputStream fileStream =
       new FileInputStream(fileName);
   BufferedInputStream bufferedStream =
       new BufferedInputStream(fileStream);
   ObjectInputStream objectStream =
       new ObjectInputStream(bufferedStream);
A FileInputStream object provides only rudimentary I/O: it is not capable of
performing buffered I/O, nor can it read or write serialized objects. The
BufferedInputStream object adds buffering to a FileInputStream, and the
ObjectInputStream adds the ability to read and write serialized objects. The first
two objects in the code above, fileStream and bufferedStream, are never used
once the file has been opened; all future operations use objectStream.
     It is particularly annoying (and error-prone) that buffering must be requested
explicitly by creating a separate BufferedInputStream object; if a developer
forgets to create this object, there will be no buffering and I/O will be slow.
Perhaps the Java developers would argue that not everyone wants to use buffering
for file I/O, so it shouldn’t be built into the base mechanism. They might argue
that it’s better to keep buffering separate, so people can choose whether or not to
use it. Providing choice is good, but interfaces should be designed to make the
common case as simple as possible (see the formula on page 6). Almost every
user of file I/O will want buffering, so it should be provided by default. For those
few situations where buffering is not desirable, the library can provide a
mechanism to disable it. Any mechanism for disabling buffering should be
cleanly separated in the interface (for example, by providing a different
constructor for FileInputStream, or through a method that disables or replaces
the buffering mechanism), so that most developers do not even need to be aware
of its existence.
     In contrast, the designers of the Unix system calls made the common case
simple. For example, they recognized that sequential I/O is most common, so
they made that the default behavior. Random access is still relatively easy to do,
using the lseek system call, but a developer doing only sequential access need
not be aware of that mechanism. If an interface has many features, but most
developers only need to be aware of a few of them, the effective complexity of
that interface is just the complexity of the commonly used features.


4.8 Conclusion
By separating the interface of a module from its implementation, we can hide the
complexity of the implementation from the rest of the system. Users of a module
need only understand the abstraction provided by its interface. The most
important issue in designing classes and other modules is to make them deep, so
that they have simple interfaces for the common use cases, yet still provide
significant functionality. This maximizes the amount of complexity that is
concealed.


   1There exist languages, mostly in the research community, where the overall behavior of a method or

function can be described formally using a specification language. The specification can be checked
automatically to ensure that it matches the implementation. An interesting question is whether such a formal
specification could replace the informal parts of an interface. My current opinion is that an interface
described in English is likely to be more intuitive and understandable for developers than one written in a
formal specification language.
