                                                                                  9.4   Architecture   443


in enterprise environments to create storage area networks (SANs) where multiple storage devices
can be connected to multiple servers via a Fibre Channel Fabric. This offers greater scalability
and accessibility than other interfaces, and is similar to connecting multiple hosts via a net-
work. And, like networking, FC can involve using switches to connect together multiple local
endpoints (server and storage). Development of a Fibre Channel standard began in 1988 with
the first version approved by ANSI in 1994 [FICA 20]. There have since been many variants and
speed improvements, with the recent Gen 7 256GFC standard reaching up to 51,200 MB/s full
duplex [FICA 18].


NVMe
Non-Volatile Memory express (NVMe) is a PCIe bus specification for storage devices. Rather than
connecting storage devices to a storage controller card, an NVMe device is itself a card that con-
nects directly to the PCIe bus. Created in 2011, the first NVMe specification was 1.0e (released
in 2013), and the latest is 1.4 (2019) [NVMe 20]. Newer specifications add various features, for
example, thermal management features and commands for self-testing, verifying data, and sani-
tizing data (making recovery impossible). The bandwidth of NVMe cards is bounded by the PCIe
bus; PCIe version 4.0, commonly used today, has a single-direction bandwidth of 31.5 Gbytes/s
for a x16 card (link width).

An advantage with NVMe over traditional SAS and SATA is its support for multiple hardware
queues. These queues can be used from the same CPU to promote cache warmth (and with
Linux multi-queue support, shared kernel locks are also avoided). These queues also allow much
greater buffering, supporting up to 64 thousand commands in each queue, whereas typical SAS
and SATA are limited to 256 and 32 commands respectively.

NVMe also supports SR-IOV for improving virtual machine storage performance (see Chapter 11,
Cloud Computing, Section 11.2, Hardware Virtualization).

NVMe is used for low-latency flash devices, with an expected I/O latency of less than
20 microseconds.


9.4.3     Storage Types
Storage can be provided to a server in a number of ways; the following sections describe four
general architectures: disk devices, RAID, storage arrays, and network-attached storage (NAS).


Disk Devices
The simplest architecture is a server with internal disks, individually controlled by the operat-
ing system. The disks connect to a disk controller, which is circuitry on the main board or an
expander card, and which allows the disk devices to be seen and accessed. In this architecture
the disk controller merely acts as a conduit so that the system can communicate with the disks.
A typical personal computer or laptop has a disk attached in this way for primary storage.

This architecture is the easiest to analyze using performance tools, as each disk is known to the
operating system and can be observed separately.

Some disk controllers support this architecture, where it is called just a bunch of disks (JBOD).
444   Chapter 9 Disks


      RAID
      Advanced disk controllers can provide the redundant array of independent disks (RAID) archi-
      tecture for disk devices (originally the redundant array of inexpensive disks [Patterson 88]). RAID
      can present multiple disks as a single big, fast, and reliable virtual disk. These controllers often
      include an on-board cache (RAM) to improve read and write performance.

      Providing RAID by a disk controller card is called hardware RAID. RAID can also be implemented
      by operating system software, but hardware RAID has been preferred as CPU-expensive check-
      sum and parity calculations can be performed more quickly on dedicated hardware, plus such
      hardware can include a battery backup unit (BBU) for improved resiliency. However, advances in
      processors have produced CPUs with a surplus of cycles and cores, reducing the need to offload
      parity calculations. A number of storage solutions have moved back to software RAID (for exam-
      ple, using ZFS), which reduces complexity and hardware cost and improves observability from the
      operating system. In the case of a major failure, software RAID may also be easier to repair than
      hardware RAID (imagine a dead RAID card).

      The following sections describe the performance characteristics of RAID. The term stripe is often
      used: this refers to when data is grouped as blocks that are written across multiple drives (like
      drawing a stripe through them all).

      Types
      Various RAID types are available to meet varying needs for capacity, performance, and reliabil-
      ity. This summary focuses on the performance characteristics shown in Table 9.3.


      Table 9.3     RAID types
      Level         Description                            Performance
      0 (concat.)   Drives are filled one at a time.       Eventually improves random read performance
                                                           when multiple drives can take part.
      0 (stripe)    Drives are used in parallel,           Expected best random and sequential I/O
                    splitting (striping) I/O across        performance (depends on stripe size and
                    multiple drives.                       workload pattern).
      1 (mirror)    Multiple drives (usually two) are      Good random and sequential read
                    grouped, storing identical content     performance (can read from all drives
                    for redundancy.                        simultaneously, depending on implementation).
                                                           Writes limited by slowest disk in mirror, and
                                                           throughput overheads doubled (two drives).
      10            A combination of RAID-0 stripes        Similar performance characteristics to RAID-1
                    across groups of RAID-1 drives,        but allows more groups of drives to take part,
                    providing capacity and redundancy.     like RAID-0, increasing bandwidth.
      5             Data is stored as stripes across       Poor write performance due to read-modify-
                    multiple disks, along with extra       write cycle and parity calculations.
                    parity information for redundancy.
      6             RAID-5 with two parity disks per       Similar to RAID-5 but worse.
                    stripe.
                                                                                  9.4    Architecture   445


While RAID-0 striping performs the best, it has no redundancy, making it impractical for most
production use. Possible exceptions include fault-tolerant cloud computing environments that
does not store critical data and where a failed instance will automatically be replaced, and stor-
age servers used for caching only.

Observability
As described in the earlier section on virtual disk utilization, the use of hardware-supplied vir-
tual disk devices can make observability more difficult in the operating system, which does not
know what the physical disks are doing. If RAID is supplied via software, individual disk devices
can usually be observed, as the operating system manages them directly.

Read-Modify-Write
When data is stored as a stripe including a parity, as with RAID-5, write I/O can incur additional
read I/O and compute time. This is because writes that are smaller than the stripe size may
require the entire stripe to be read, the bytes modified, the parity recalculated, and then the
stripe rewritten. An optimization for RAID-5 may be in use to avoid this: instead of reading
the entire stripe, only the portions of the stripe (strips) are read that include the modified data,
along with the parity. By a sequence of XOR operations, an updated parity can be calculated
and written along with the modified strips.

Writes that span the entire stripe can write over the previous contents, without needing to read
them first. Performance in this environment may be improved by balancing the size of the stripe
with the average I/O size of the writes, to reduce the additional read overhead.

Caches
Disk controllers that implement RAID-5 can mitigate read-write-modify performance by use of
a write-back cache. These caches must be battery-backed, so that in the event of a power failure
they can still complete buffered writes.

Additional Features
Be aware that advanced disk controller cards can provide advanced features that can affect
performance. It is a good idea to browse the vendor documentation so that you’re at least aware
of what may be in play. For example, here are a couple of features from Dell PERC 5 cards
[Dell 20]:
    ■   Patrol read: Every several days, all disk blocks are read and their checksums verified. If
        the disks are busy servicing requests, the resources given to the patrol read function are
        reduced, to avoid competing with the system workload.
    ■   Cache flush interval: The time in seconds between flushing dirty data in the cache to
        disk. Longer times may reduce disk I/O due to write cancellation and better aggregate
        writes; however, they may also cause higher read latency during the larger flushes.

Both of these can have a significant effect on performance.
446   Chapter 9 Disks


      Storage Arrays
      Storage arrays allow many disks to be connected to the system. They use advanced disk controllers
      so that RAID can be configured, and they usually provide a large cache (gigabytes) to improve
      read and write performance. These caches are also typically battery-backed, allowing them to
      operate in write-back mode. A common policy is to switch to write-through mode if the bat-
      tery fails, which may be noticed as a sudden drop in write performance due to waiting for the
      read-modify-write cycle.

      An additional performance consideration is how the storage array is attached to the system—
      usually via an external storage controller card. The card, and the transport between it and the
      storage array, will both have limits for IOPS and throughput. For improvements in both perfor-
      mance and reliability, storage arrays are often dual-attachable, meaning they can be connected
      using two physical cables, to one or two different storage controller cards.


      Network-Attached Storage
      NAS is provided to the system over the existing network via a network protocol, such as NFS,
      SMB/CIFS, or iSCSI, usually from dedicated systems known as NAS appliances. These are sepa-
      rate systems and should be analyzed as such. Some performance analysis may be done on the
      client, to inspect the workload applied and I/O latencies. The performance of the network also
      becomes a factor, and issues can arise from network congestion and from multiple-hop latency.


      9.4.4     Operating System Disk I/O Stack
      The components and layers in a disk I/O stack will depend on the operating system, version,
      and software and hardware technologies used. Figure 9.7 depicts a general model. See Chapter 3,
      Operating Systems, for a similar model including the application.




      Figure 9.7 Generic disk I/O stack
                                                                               9.4   Architecture   447



Block Device Interface
The block device interface was created in early Unix for accessing storage devices in units of
blocks of 512 bytes, and to provide a buffer cache to improve performance. The interface exists
in Linux, although the role of the buffer cache has diminished as other file system caches have
been introduced, as described in Chapter 8, File Systems.

Unix provided a path to bypass the buffer cache, called raw block device I/O (or just raw I/O),
which could be used via character special device files (see Chapter 3, Operating Systems). These
files are no longer commonly available by default in Linux. Raw block device I/O is different
from, but in some ways similar to, the “direct I/O” file system feature described in Chapter 8,
File Systems.

The block I/O interface can usually be observed from operating system performance tools
(iostat(1)). It is also a common location for static instrumentation and more recently can be
explored with dynamic instrumentation as well. Linux has enhanced this area of the kernel
with additional features.


Linux
The main components of the Linux block I/O stack are shown in Figure 9.8.




Figure 9.8 Linux I/O stack
448   Chapter 9 Disks


      Linux has enhanced block I/O with the addition of I/O merging and I/O schedulers for improving
      performance, volume managers for grouping multiple devices, and a device mapper for creating
      virtual devices.

      I/O merging
      When I/O requests are created, Linux can merge and coalesce them as shown in Figure 9.9.




      Figure 9.9 I/O merging types

      This groups I/O, reducing the per-I/O CPU overheads in the kernel storage stack and overheads
      on the disk, improving throughput. Statistics for these front and back merges are available in
      iostat(1).

      After merging, I/O is then scheduled for delivery to the disks.

      I/O Schedulers
      I/O is queued and scheduled in the block layer either by classic schedulers (only present in Linux
      versions older than 5.0) or by the newer multi-queue schedulers. These schedulers allow I/O to
      be reordered (or rescheduled) for optimized delivery. This can improve and more fairly balance
      performance, especially for devices with high I/O latencies (rotational disks).

      Classic schedulers include:

          ■   Noop: This doesn’t perform scheduling (noop is CPU-talk for no-operation) and can
              be used when the overhead of scheduling is deemed unnecessary (for example, in a
              RAM disk).
          ■   Deadline: Attempts to enforce a latency deadline; for example, read and write expiry
              times in units of milliseconds may be selected. This can be useful for real-time systems,
              where determinism is desired. It can also solve problems of starvation: where an I/O
              request is starved of disk resources as newly issued I/O jump the queue, resulting in a
              latency outlier. Starvation can occur due to writes starving reads, and as a consequence of
              elevator seeking and heavy I/O to one area of disk starving I/O to another. The deadline
              scheduler solves this, in part, by using three separate queues for I/O: read FIFO, write FIFO,
              and sorted [Love 10].
                                                                                   9.5    Methodology      449


    ■   CFQ: The completely fair queueing scheduler allocates I/O time slices to processes, similar
        to CPU scheduling, for fair usage of disk resources. It also allows priorities and classes to be
        set for user processes, via the ionice(1) command.

A problem with the classic schedulers was their use of a single request queue, protected by a
single lock, which became a performance bottleneck at high I/O rates. The multi-queue driver
(blk-mq, added in Linux 3.13) solves this by using separate submission queues for each CPU, and
multiple dispatch queues for the devices. This delivers better performance and lower latency for
I/O versus classic schedulers, as requests can be processed in parallel and on the same CPU where
the I/O was initiated. This was necessary to support flash memory-based and other device types
capable of handling millions of IOPS [Corbet 13b].

Multi-queue schedulers include:
    ■   None: No queueing.
    ■   BFQ: The budget fair queueing scheduler, similar to CFQ, but allocates bandwidth as
        well as I/O time. It creates a queue for each process performing disk I/O, and maintains a
        budget for each queue measured in sectors. There is also a system-wide budget timeout to
        prevent one process from holding a device for too long. BFQ supports cgroups.
    ■   mq-deadline: A blk-mq version of deadline (described earlier).
    ■   Kyber: A scheduler that adjusts read and write dispatch queue lengths based on perfor-
        mance so that target read or write latencies can be met. It is a simple scheduler that only
        has two tunables: the target read latency (read_lat_nsec) and target synchronous write
        latency (write_lat_nsec). Kyber has shown improved storage I/O latencies in the Netflix
        cloud, where it is used by default.

Since Linux 5.0, the multi-queue schedulers are the default (the classic schedulers are no longer
included).

I/O schedulers are documented in detail in the Linux source under Documentation/block.

After I/O scheduling, the request is placed on the block device queue for issuing to the device.



9.5 Methodology
This section describes various methodologies and exercises for disk I/O analysis and tuning. The
topics are summarized in Table 9.4.


Table 9.4     Disk performance methodologies
Section        Methodology                        Types
9.5.1          Tools method                       Observational analysis
9.5.2          USE method                         Observational analysis
9.5.3          Performance monitoring             Observational analysis, capacity planning
9.5.4          Workload characterization          Observational analysis, capacity planning
9.5.5          Latency analysis                   Observational analysis
450   Chapter 9 Disks



      Section        Methodology                     Types
      9.5.6          Static performance tuning       Observational analysis, capacity planning
      9.5.7          Cache tuning                    Observational analysis, tuning
      9.5.8          Resource controls               Tuning
      9.5.9          Micro-benchmarking              Experimentation analysis
      9.5.10         Scaling                         Capacity planning, tuning



      See Chapter 2, Methodologies, for more methodologies and the introduction to many of these.

      These methods may be followed individually or used in combination. When investigating disk
      issues, my suggestion is to use the following strategies, in this order: the USE method, perfor-
      mance monitoring, workload characterization, latency analysis, micro-benchmarking, static
      analysis, and event tracing.

      Section 9.6, Observability Tools, shows operating system tools for applying these methods.


      9.5.1 Tools Method
      The tools method is a process of iterating over available tools, examining key metrics they pro-
      vide. While a simple methodology, it can overlook issues for which the tools provide poor or no
      visibility, and it can be time-consuming to perform.

      For disks, the tools method can involve checking the following (for Linux):

         ■    iostat: Using extended mode to look for busy disks (over 60% utilization), high average
              service times (over, say, 10 ms), and high IOPS (depends)
         ■    iotop/biotop: To identify which process is causing disk I/O
         ■    biolatency: To examine the distribution of I/O latency as a histogram, looking for multi-
              modal distributions and latency outliers (over, say, 100 ms)
         ■    biosnoop: To examine individual I/O
         ■    perf(1)/BCC/bpftrace: For custom analysis including viewing user and kernel stacks that
              issued I/O
         ■    Disk-controller-specific tools (from the vendor)

      If an issue is found, examine all fields from the available tools to learn more context. See
      Section 9.6, Observability Tools, for more about each tool. Other methodologies can also be
      used, which can identify more types of issues.


      9.5.2      USE Method
      The USE method is for identifying bottlenecks and errors across all components, early in a per-
      formance investigation. The sections that follow describe how the USE method can be applied
      to disk devices and controllers, while Section 9.6, Observability Tools, shows tools for measuring
      specific metrics.
                                                                                            9.5    Methodology   451



Disk Devices
For each disk device, check for:

    ■   Utilization: The time the device was busy
    ■   Saturation: The degree to which I/O is waiting in a queue
    ■   Errors: Device errors

Errors may be checked first. They sometimes get overlooked because the system functions
correctly—albeit more slowly—in spite of disk failures: disks are commonly configured in a
redundant pool of disks designed to tolerate some failure. Apart from standard disk error count-
ers from the operating system, disk devices may support a wider variety of error counters that
can be retrieved by special tools (for example, SMART data6).

If the disk devices are physical disks, utilization should be straightforward to find. If they are
virtual disks, utilization may not reflect what the underlying physical disks are doing. See
Section 9.3.9, Utilization, for more discussion on this.


Disk Controllers
For each disk controller, check for:

    ■   Utilization: Current versus maximum throughput, and the same for operation rate
    ■   Saturation: The degree to which I/O is waiting due to controller saturation
    ■   Errors: Controller errors

Here the utilization metric is not defined in terms of time, but rather in terms of the limitations
of the disk controller card: throughput (bytes per second) and operation rate (operations per
second). Operations are inclusive of read/write and other disk commands. Either throughput or
operation rate may also be limited by the transport connecting the disk controller to the system,
just as it may also be limited by the transport from the controller to the individual disks. Each
transport should be checked the same way: errors, utilization, saturation.

You may find that the observability tools (e.g., Linux iostat(1)) do not present per-controller met-
rics but provide them only per disk. There are workarounds for this: if the system has only one
controller, you can determine the controller IOPS and throughput by summing those metrics for
all disks. If the system has multiple controllers, you will need to determine which disks belong
to which, and sum the metrics accordingly.

Performance of disk controllers and transports is often overlooked. Fortunately, they are not
common sources of system bottlenecks, as their capacity typically exceeds that of the attached
disks. If total disk throughput or IOPS always levels off at a certain rate, even under different
workloads, this may be a clue that the disk controllers or transports are in fact causing the
problems.




6
 On Linux, see tools such as MegaCLI and smartctl (covered later), cciss-vol-status, cpqarrayd, varmon, and
dpt-i2o-raidutils.
452   Chapter 9 Disks


      9.5.3 Performance Monitoring
      Performance monitoring can identify active issues and patterns of behavior over time. Key
      metrics for disk I/O are:
          ■   Disk utilization
          ■   Response time

      Disk utilization at 100% for multiple seconds is very likely an issue. Depending on your envi-
      ronment, over 60% may also cause poor performance due to increased queueing. The value for
      “normal” or “bad” depends on your workload, environment, and latency requirements. If you
      aren’t sure, micro-benchmarks of known-to-be-good versus bad workloads may be performed to
      show how these can be found via disk metrics. See Section 9.8, Experimentation.

      These metrics should be examined on a per-disk basis, to look for unbalanced workloads and
      individual poorly performing disks. The response time metric may be monitored as a per-second
      average and can include other values such as the maximum and standard deviation. Ideally, it
      would be possible to inspect the full distribution of response times, such as by using a histogram
      or heat map, to look for latency outliers and other patterns.

      If the system imposes disk I/O resource controls, statistics to show if and when these were in use
      can also be collected. Disk I/O may be a bottleneck as a consequence of the imposed limit, not
      the activity of the disk itself.

      Utilization and response time show the result of disk performance. More metrics may be added
      to characterize the workload, including IOPS and throughput, providing important data for use
      in capacity planning (see the next section and Section 9.5.10, Scaling).


      9.5.4 Workload Characterization
      Characterizing the load applied is an important exercise in capacity planning, benchmarking,
      and simulating workloads. It can also lead to some of the largest performance gains, by identify-
      ing unnecessary work that can be eliminated.

      The following are basic attributes for characterizing disk I/O workload:

          ■   I/O rate
          ■   I/O throughput
          ■   I/O size
          ■   Read/write ratio
          ■   Random versus sequential

      Random versus sequential, the read/write ratio, and I/O size are described in Section 9.3, Concepts.
      I/O rate (IOPS) and I/O throughput are defined in Section 9.1, Terminology.

      These characteristics can vary from second to second, especially for applications and file systems
      that buffer and flush writes at intervals. To better characterize the workload, capture maximum
      values as well as averages. Better still, examine the full distribution of values over time.
                                                                               9.5   Methodology     453


Here is an example workload description, to show how these attributes can be expressed together:

    The system disks have a light random read workload, averaging 350 IOPS with a
    throughput of 3 Mbytes/s, running at 96% reads. There are occasional short bursts of
    sequential writes, lasting between 2 and 5 seconds, which drive the disks to a maxi-
    mum of 4,800 IOPS and 560 Mbytes/s. The reads are around 8 Kbytes in size, and the
    writes around 128 Kbytes.

Apart from describing these characteristics system-wide, they can also be used to describe per-
disk and per-controller I/O workloads.


Advanced Workload Characterization/Checklist
Additional details may be included to characterize the workload. These have been listed here
as questions for consideration, which may also serve as a checklist when studying disk issues
thoroughly:
   ■   What is the IOPS rate system-wide? Per disk? Per controller?
   ■   What is the throughput system-wide? Per disk? Per controller?
   ■   Which applications or users are using the disks?
   ■   What file systems or files are being accessed?
   ■   Have any errors been encountered? Were they due to invalid requests, or issues on the disk?
   ■   How balanced is the I/O over available disks?
   ■   What is the IOPS for each transport bus involved?
   ■   What is the throughput for each transport bus involved?
   ■   What non-data-transfer disk commands are being issued?
   ■   Why is disk I/O issued (kernel call path)?
   ■   To what degree is disk I/O application-synchronous?
   ■   What is the distribution of I/O arrival times?

IOPS and throughput questions can be posed for reads and writes separately. Any of these may
also be checked over time, to look for maximums, minimums, and time-based variations. Also see
Chapter 2, Methodologies, Section 2.5.11, Workload Characterization, which provides a higher-
level summary of the characteristics to measure (who, why, what, how).


Performance Characterization
The previous workload characterization lists examine the workload applied. The following
examines the resulting performance:
   ■   How busy is each disk (utilization)?
   ■   How saturated is each disk with I/O (wait queueing)?
   ■   What is the average I/O service time?
454   Chapter 9 Disks


          ■   What is the average I/O wait time?
          ■   Are there I/O outliers with high latency?
          ■   What is the full distribution of I/O latency?
          ■   Are system resource controls, such as I/O throttling, present and active?
          ■   What is the latency of non data-transfer disk commands?


      Event Tracing
      Tracing tools can be used to record all file system operations and details to a log for later analysis
      (e.g., Section 9.6.7, biosnoop). This can include the disk device ID, I/O or command type, offset,
      size, issue and completion timestamps, completion status, and originating process ID and name
      (when possible). With the issue and completion timestamps, the I/O latency can be calculated
      (or it can be directly included in the log). By studying the sequence of request and completion
      timestamps, I/O reordering by the device can also be identified. While this may be the ultimate
      tool for workload characterization, in practice it may cost noticeable overhead to capture and save,
      depending on the rate of disk operations. If the disk writes for the event trace are included in the
      trace, it may not only pollute the trace, but also create a feedback loop and a performance problem.


      9.5.5 Latency Analysis
      Latency analysis involves drilling deeper into the system to find the source of latency. With disks,
      this will often end at the disk interface: the time between an I/O request and the completion inter-
      rupt. If this matches the I/O latency at the application level, it’s usually safe to assume that the I/O
      latency originates from the disks, allowing you to focus your investigation on them. If the latency
      differs, measuring it at different levels of the operating system stack will identify the origin.

      Figure 9.10 pictures a generic I/O stack, with the latency shown at different levels of two I/O
      outliers, A and B.

      The latency of I/O A is similar at each level from the application down to the disk drivers. This
      correlation points to the disks (or the disk driver) as the cause of the latency. This could be inferred
      if the layers were measured independently, based on the similar latency values between them.

      The latency of B appears to originate at the file system level (locking or queueing?), with the I/O
      latency at lower levels contributing much less time. Be aware that different layers of the stack
      may inflate or deflate I/O, which means the size, count, and latency will differ from one layer to
      the next. The B example may be a case of only observing one I/O at the lower levels (of 10 ms),
      but failing to account for other related I/O that occurred to service the same file system I/O (e.g.,
      metadata).

      The latency at each level may be presented as:

          ■   Per-interval I/O averages: As typically reported by operating system tools.
          ■   Full I/O distributions: As histograms or heat maps; see Section 9.7.3, Latency Heat Maps.
          ■   Per-I/O latency values: See the earlier Event Tracing section.

      The last two are useful for tracking the origin of outliers and can help identify cases where I/O
      has been split or coalesced.
                                                                                    9.5   Methodology   455




Figure 9.10 Stack latency analysis

9.5.6 Static Performance Tuning
Static performance tuning focuses on issues of the configured environment. For disk perfor-
mance, examine the following aspects of the static configuration:
   ■   How many disks are present? Of which types (e.g., SMR, MLC)? Sizes?
   ■   What version is the disk firmware?
   ■   How many disk controllers are present? Of which interface types?
   ■   Are disk controller cards connected to high-speed slots?
   ■   How many disks are connected to each HBA?
   ■   If disk/controller battery backups are present, what is their power level?
   ■   What version is the disk controller firmware?
   ■   Is RAID configured? How exactly, including stripe width?
   ■   Is multipathing available and configured?
   ■   What version is the disk device driver?
   ■   What is the server main memory size? In use by the page and buffer caches?
   ■   Are there operating system bugs/patches for any of the storage device drivers?
   ■   Are there resource controls in use for disk I/O?

Be aware that performance bugs may exist in device drivers and firmware, which are ideally
fixed by updates from the vendor.
456   Chapter 9 Disks


      Answering these questions can reveal configuration choices that have been overlooked.
      Sometimes a system has been configured for one workload, and then repurposed for another.
      This strategy will revisit those choices.

      While working as the performance lead for Sun’s ZFS storage product, the most common
      performance complaint I received was caused by a misconfiguration: using half a JBOD (12 disks)
      of RAID-Z2 (wide stripes). This configuration delivered good reliability but unimpressive perfor-
      mance, similar to that of a single disk. I learned to ask for configuration details first (usually over
      the phone) before spending time logging in to the system and examining I/O latency.


      9.5.7 Cache Tuning
      There may be many different caches present in the system, including application-level, file sys-
      tem, disk controller, and on the disk itself. A list of these was included in Section 9.3.3, Caching,
      which can be tuned as described in Chapter 2, Methodologies, Section 2.5.18, Cache Tuning. In
      summary, check which caches exist, check that they are working, check how well they are work-
      ing, and then tune the workload for the cache and tune the cache for the workload.


      9.5.8       Resource Controls
      The operating system may provide controls for allocating disk I/O resources to processes or
      groups of processes. These may include fixed limits for IOPS and throughput, or shares for a
      more flexible approach. How these work are implementation-specific, as discussed in Section 9.9,
      Tuning.


      9.5.9 Micro-Benchmarking
      Micro-benchmarking disk I/O was introduced in Chapter 8, File Systems, which explains the dif-
      ference between testing file system I/O and testing disk I/O. Here we would like to test disk I/O,
      which usually means testing via the operating system’s device paths, particularly the raw device
      path if available, to avoid all file system behavior (including caching, buffering, I/O splitting,
      I/O coalescing, code path overheads, and offset mapping differences).

      Factors for micro-benchmarking include:
          ■   Direction: Reads or writes
          ■   Disk offset pattern: Random or sequential
          ■   Range of offsets: Full disk or tight ranges (e.g., offset 0 only)
          ■   I/O size: 512 bytes (typical minimum) up to 1 Mbyte
          ■   Concurrency: Number of I/O in flight, or number of threads performing I/O
          ■   Number of devices: Single disk tests, or multiple disks (to explore controller and bus
              limits)

      The next two sections show how these factors can be combined to test disk and disk controller
      performance. See Section 9.8, Experimentation, for details of the specific tools that can be used
      to perform these tests.
                                                                                                  9.5   Methodology   457



Disks
Micro-benchmarking can be performed on a per-disk basis to determine the following, along
with suggested workloads:
       ■   Maximum disk throughput (Mbytes per second): 128 Kbyte or 1 Mbyte reads, sequential
       ■   Maximum disk operation rate (IOPS): 512-byte reads,7 offset 0 only
       ■   Maximum disk random reads (IOPS): 512-byte reads, random offsets
       ■   Read latency profile (average microseconds): Sequential reads, repeat for 512 bytes, 1K,
           2K, 4K, and so on
       ■   Random I/O latency profile (average microseconds): 512-byte reads, repeat for full offset
           span, beginning offsets only, end offsets only

These tests can be repeated for writes. The use of “offset 0 only” is intended to cache the data in
the on-disk cache, so that cache access time can be measured.8


Disk Controllers
Disk controllers may be micro-benchmarked by applying a workload to multiple disks, designed
to hit limits in the controller. These tests may be performed using the following, along with
suggested workloads for the disks:
       ■   Maximum controller throughput (Mbytes per second): 128 Kbytes, offset 0 only
       ■   Maximum controller operation rate (IOPS): 512-byte reads, offset 0 only

Apply the workload to the disks one by one, watching for limits. It may take over a dozen disks to
find the limit in a disk controller.


9.5.10           Scaling
Disks and disk controllers have throughput and IOPS limits, which can be demonstrated via
micro-benchmarking as described previously. Tuning can improve performance only up to these
limits. If more disk performance is needed, and other strategies such as caching won’t work, the
disks will need to scale.

Here is a simple method, based on capacity planning of resources:

      1. Determine the target disk workload, in terms of throughput and IOPS. If this is a new sys-
         tem, see Chapter 2, Methodologies, Section 2.7, Capacity Planning. If the system already
         has a workload, express the user population in terms of current disk throughput and IOPS,
         and scale these numbers to the target user population. (If cache is not scaled at the same
         time, the disk workload may increase, because the cache-per-user ratio becomes smaller.)

      2. Calculate the number of disks required to support this workload. Factor in RAID config-
         uration. Do not use the maximum throughput and IOPS values per disk, as this would


7
    This size is intended to match the smallest disk block size. Many disks today use 4 Kbytes.
8
 I’ve heard a rumor that some drive manufacturers have firmware routines to accelerate sector 0 I/O, inflating per-
formance for such a test. You can verify by testing sector 0 versus sector your_favorite_number.
458   Chapter 9 Disks


              result in driving disks at 100% utilization, leading to immediate performance issues due to
              saturation and queueing. Pick a target utilization (say, 50%) and scale values accordingly.

         3. Calculate the number of disk controllers required to support this workload.

         4. Check that transport limits have not been exceeded, and scale transports if necessary.

         5. Calculate CPU cycles per disk I/O, and the number of CPUs required (this may necessitate
            multiple CPUs and parallel I/O).

      The maximum per-disk throughput and IOPS numbers used will depend on their type and
      the disk type. See Section 9.3.7, IOPS Are Not Equal. Micro-benchmarking can be used to find
      specific limits for a given I/O size and I/O type, and workload characterization can be used on
      existing workloads to see which sizes and types matter.

      To deliver the disk workload requirement, it’s not uncommon to find servers requiring dozens of
      disks, connected via storage arrays. We used to say, “Add more spindles.” We may now say, “Add
      more flash.”



      9.6        Observability Tools
      This section introduces disk I/O observability tools for Linux-based operating systems. See the
      previous section for strategies to follow when using them.

      The tools in this section are listed in Table 9.5.


      Table 9.5     Disk observability tools
      Section         Tool              Description
      9.6.1           iostat            Various per-disk statistics
      9.6.2           sar               Historical disk statistics
      9.6.3           PSI               Disk pressure stall information
      9.6.4           pidstat           Disk I/O usage by process
      9.6.5           perf              Record block I/O tracepoints
      9.6.6           biolatency        Summarize disk I/O latency as a histogram
      9.6.7           biosnoop          Trace disk I/O with PID and latency
      9.6.8           iotop, biotop     Top for disks: summarize disk I/O by process
      9.6.9           biostacks         Show disk I/O with initialization stacks
      9.6.10          blktrace          Disk I/O event tracing
      9.6.11          bpftrace          Custom disk tracing
      9.6.12          MegaCli           LSI controller statistics
      9.6.13          smartctl          Disk controller statistics
                                                                                        9.6 Observability Tools     459


This is a selection of tools to support Section 9.5, Methodology, beginning with traditional tools
and statistics, then tracing tools, and finally disk controller statistics. Some of the traditional
tools are likely available on other Unix-like operating systems where they originated, including:
iostat(8) and sar(1). Many of the tracing tools are BPF-based, and use BCC and bpftrace frontends
(Chapter 15); they are: biolatency(8), biosnoop(8), biotop(8), and biostacks(8).

See the documentation for each tool, including its man pages, for full references of its features.


9.6.1         iostat
iostat(1) summarizes per-disk I/O statistics, providing metrics for workload characterization, uti-
lization, and saturation. It can be executed by any user and is typically the first command used
to investigate disk I/O issues at the command line. The statistics it provides are also typically
shown by monitoring software, so it can be worthwhile to learn iostat(1) in detail to deepen your
understanding of monitoring statistics. These statistics are enabled by default by the kernel,9 so
the overhead of this tool is considered negligible.

The name “iostat” is short for “I/O statistics,” although it might have been better to call it
“diskiostat” to reflect the type of I/O it reports. This has led to occasional confusion when a user
knows that an application is performing I/O (to the file system) but wonders why it can’t be seen
via iostat(1) (the disks).

iostat(1) was written in the early 1980s for Unix, and different versions are available on the
different operating systems. It can be added to Linux-based systems via the sysstat package.
The following describes the Linux version.


iostat Default Output
Without any arguments or options, a summary-since-boot for CPU and disk statistics is printed.
It’s covered here as an introduction to this tool; however, you are not expected to use this mode,
as the extended mode covered later is more useful.

$ iostat
Linux 5.3.0-1010-aws (ip-10-1-239-218)                     02/12/20              _x86_64_      (2 CPU)


avg-cpu:        %user      %nice %system %iowait          %steal      %idle
                 0.29       0.01       0.18       0.03       0.21     99.28


Device                      tps       kB_read/s          kB_wrtn/s       kB_read        kB_wrtn
loop0                      0.00             0.05              0.00           1232               0
[...]
nvme0n1                    3.40            17.11             36.03        409902         863344

The first output line is a summary of the system, including the kernel version, host name, date,
architecture, and CPU count. Subsequent lines show summary-since-boot statistics for the CPUs
(avg-cpu; these statistics were covered in Chapter 6, CPUs) and disk devices (under Device:).

9
    Statistics can be disabled via the /sys/block/<dev>/queue/iostats file. I don’t know of anyone ever doing so.
460   Chapter 9 Disks


      Each disk device is shown as a row, with basic details in the columns. I’ve highlighted the col-
      umn headers in bold; they are:
          ■   tps: Transactions per second (IOPS)
          ■   kB_read/s, kB_wrtn/s: Kilobytes read per second, and written per second
          ■   kB_read, kB_wrtn: Total kilobytes read and written

      Some SCSI devices, including CD-ROMs, may not be shown by iostat(1). SCSI tape drives can be
      examined using tapestat(1) instead, also in the sysstat package. Also note that, while iostat(1)
      reports block device reads and writes, it may exclude some other types of disk device commands
      depending on the kernel (see the logic in the kernel function blk_do_io_stat()). The iostat(1)
      extended mode includes extra fields for these device commands.


      iostat Options
      iostat(1) can be executed with various options, followed by an optional interval and count. For
      example:

      # iostat 1 10

      will print one-second summaries ten times. And:

      # iostat 1

      will print one-second summaries without end (until Ctrl-C is typed).

      Commonly used options are:

          ■   -c: Display CPU report
          ■   -d: Display disk report
          ■   -k: Use kilobytes instead of (512-byte) blocks
          ■   -m: Use megabytes instead of (512-byte) blocks
          ■   -p: Include per-partition statistics
          ■   -t: Timestamp output
          ■   -x: Extended statistics
          ■   -s: Short (narrow) output
          ■   -z: Skip displaying zero-activity summaries

      There is also an environment variable, POSIXLY_CORRECT=1, to output blocks (512 bytes each)
      instead of Kbytes. Some older versions included an option for NFS statistics, -n. Since sysstat
      version 9.1.3, this was moved to the separate nfsiostat command.


      iostat Extended Short Output
      Extended output (-x) provides extra columns that are useful for the methodologies covered ear-
      lier. These extra columns include IOPS and throughput metrics for workload characterization,
                                                                           9.6 Observability Tools    461


utilization and queue lengths for the USE method, and disk response times for performance
characterization and latency analysis.

Over the years, the extended output has gained more and more fields, and the latest release
(12.3.1, Dec. 2019) produces output that is 197 characters wide. This not only does not fit in this
book, it does not fit in many wide terminals either, making the output difficult to read due to
line wraps. A solution was added in 2017, the -s option, to provide a “short” or narrow output
that is intended to fit within an 80-character width.

Here is an example of short (-s) extended (-x) statistics, and skipping zero-activity devices (-z):

$ iostat -sxz 1
[...]
avg-cpu:     %user    %nice %system %iowait       %steal     %idle
             15.82     0.00    10.71     31.63      1.53     40.31


Device                 tps        kB/s     rqm/s     await aqu-sz     areq-sz   %util
nvme0n1           1642.00     9064.00    664.00       0.44     0.00     5.52 100.00
[...]

The disk columns are:

    ■   tps: Transactions issued per second (IOPS)
    ■   kB/s: Kbytes per second
    ■   rqm/s: Requests queued and merged per second
    ■   await: Average I/O response time, including time queued in the OS and the I/O response
        time of the device (ms)
    ■   aqu-sz: Average number of requests both waiting in the driver request queue and active on
        the device
    ■   areq-sz: Average request size in Kbytes
    ■   %util: Percent of time the device was busy processing I/O requests (utilization)

The most important metric for delivered performance is await, showing the average total wait
time for I/O. What constitutes “good” or “bad” depends on your needs. In the example output,
await was 0.44 ms, which is satisfactory for this database server. It can increase for a number of
reasons: queueing (load), larger I/O sizes, random I/O on rotational devices, and device errors.

For resource usage and capacity planning, %util is important, but bear in mind that it is only a
measure of busyness (non-idle time) and may mean little for virtual devices backed by mul-
tiple disks. Those devices may be better understood by the load applied: tps (IOPS) and kB/s
(throughput).

Nonzero counts in the rqm/s column show that contiguous requests were merged before delivery
to the device, to improve performance. This metric is also a sign of a sequential workload.

Since areq-sz is after merging, small sizes (8 Kbytes or less) are an indicator of a random I/O
workload that could not be merged. Large sizes may be either large I/O or a merged sequential
workload (indicated by earlier columns).
462   Chapter 9 Disks


      iostat Extended Output
      Without the -s option, -x prints many more columns. Here is the summary since boot (no inter-
      val or count) for sysstat version 12.3.2 (from Apr 2020):

      $ iostat -x
      [...]
      Device           r/s     rkB/s           rrqm/s   %rrqm r_await rareq-sz    w/s     wkB/s
      wrqm/s %wrqm w_await wareq-sz             d/s      dkB/s   drqm/s %drqm d_await dareq-sz
      f/s f_await aqu-sz %util
      nvme0n1              0.23        9.91      0.16   40.70      0.56     43.01     3.10       33.09
      0.92 22.91         0.89     10.66     0.00        0.00       0.00    0.00     0.00       0.00
      0.00    0.00        0.00    0.12

      These break down many of the -sx metrics into read and write components, and also includes
      discards and flushes.

      The extra columns are:

          ■   r/s, w/s, d/s, f/s: Read, write, discard, and flush requests completed from the disk device
              per second (after merges)
          ■   rkB/s, wkB/s, dkB/s: Read, write, and discard Kbytes from the disk device per second
          ■   %rrqm/s, %wrqm/s, %drqm/s: Read, write, and discard requests queued and merged as a per-
              centage of the total requests for that type
          ■   r_await, w_await, d_await, f_await: Read, write, discard, and flush average response time,
              including time queued in the OS and the response time from the device (ms)
          ■   rareq-sz, wareq-sz, dareq-sz: Read, write, and discard average size (Kbytes)

      Examining reads and writes separately is important. Applications and file systems commonly
      use techniques to mitigate write latency (e.g., write-back caching), so the application is less likely
      to be blocked on disk writes. This means that any metrics that group reads and writes are skewed
      by a component that may not directly matter (the writes). By splitting them, you can start exam-
      ining r_wait, which shows average read latency, and is likely to be the most important metric for
      application performance.

      The reads and writes as IOPS (r/s, w/s) and throughput (rkB/s, wkB/s) are important for workload
      characterization.

      The discard and flush statistics are new additions to iostat(1). Discard operations free up blocks
      on the drive (the ATA TRIM command), and their statistics were added in the Linux 4.19 kernel.
      Flush statistics were added in Linux 5.5. These can help to narrow down the reason for disk
      latency.

      Here is another useful iostat(1) combination:

      $ iostat -dmstxz -p ALL 1
      Linux 5.3.0-1010-aws (ip-10-1-239-218)            02/12/20           _x86_64_   (2 CPU)
                                                                            9.6 Observability Tools     463


02/12/20 17:39:29
Device                tps        MB/s     rqm/s      await    areq-sz   aqu-sz    %util
nvme0n1              3.33        0.04      1.09       0.87      12.84      0.00    0.12
nvme0n1p1            3.31        0.04      1.09       0.87      12.91      0.00    0.12


02/12/20 17:39:30
Device                tps        MB/s     rqm/s      await    areq-sz   aqu-sz    %util
nvme0n1          1730.00        14.97    709.00       0.54       8.86      0.02   99.60
nvme0n1p1        1538.00        14.97    709.00       0.61       9.97      0.02   99.60
[...]

The first output is the summary since boot, followed by one-second intervals. The -d focuses on
disk statistics only (no CPU), -m for Mbytes, and -t for the timestamp, which can be useful when
comparing the output to other timestamped sources, and-p ALL includes per-partition statistics.

Unfortunately, the current version of iostat(1) does not include disk errors; otherwise all USE
method metrics could be checked from one tool!


9.6.2 sar
The system activity reporter, sar(1), can be used to observe current activity and can be config-
ured to archive and report historical statistics. It is introduced in Section 4.4, sar, and mentioned
in various other chapters in this book for the different statistics it provides.

The sar(1) disk summary is printed using the -d option, demonstrated in the following examples
with an interval of one second. The output is wide, so it is included here in two parts (sysstat
12.3.2):

$ sar -d 1
Linux 5.3.0-1010-aws (ip-10-0-239-218)             02/13/20          _x86_64_     (2 CPU)


09:10:22             DEV         tps      rkB/s        wkB/s       dkB/s     areq-sz \ ...
09:10:23       dev259-0      1509.00    11100.00    12776.00        0.00       15.82 / ...
[...]

Here are the remaining columns:

$ sar -d 1
09:10:22       \ ... \     aqu-sz       await       %util
09:10:23       / ... /       0.02       0.60        94.00
[...]

These columns also appear in iostat(1) -x output, and were described in the previous section.
This output shows a mixed read/write workload with an await of 0.6 ms, driving the disk to 94%
utilization.
464   Chapter 9 Disks


      Previous versions of sar(1) included a svctm (service time) column: the average (inferred) disk
      response time, in milliseconds. See Section 9.3.1, Measuring Time, for background on service
      time. Since its simplistic calculation was no longer accurate for modern disks that perform I/O in
      parallel, svctm has been removed in later versions.


      9.6.3      PSI
      Linux pressure stall information (PSI), added in Linux 4.20, includes statistics for I/O saturation.
      These not only show if there is I/O pressure, but how it is changing over the last five minutes.
      Example output:

      # cat /proc/pressure/io
      some avg10=63.11 avg60=32.18 avg300=8.62 total=667212021
      full avg10=60.76 avg60=31.13 avg300=8.35 total=622722632

      This output shows that I/O pressure is increasing, with a higher 10-second average (63.11) than
      the 300-second average (8.62). These averages are percentages of time that a task was I/O stalled.
      The some line shows when some tasks (threads) were affected, and the full line shows when all
      runnable tasks were affected.

      As with load averages, this can be a high-level metric used for alerting. Once you become aware
      that there is a disk performance issue, you can use other tools to find the root causes, including
      pidstat(8) for disk statistics by process.


      9.6.4      pidstat
      The Linux pidstat(1) tool prints CPU usage by default and includes a -d option for disk I/O statis-
      tics. This is available on kernels 2.6.20 and later. For example:

      $ pidstat -d 1
      Linux 5.3.0-1010-aws (ip-10-0-239-218)           02/13/20            _x86_64_    (2 CPU)


      09:47:41         UID        PID    kB_rd/s    kB_wr/s kB_ccwr/s iodelay         Command
      09:47:42           0      2705    32468.00        0.00        0.00         5    tar
      09:47:42           0      2706        0.00    8192.00         0.00         0    gzip


      [...]
      09:47:56         UID        PID    kB_rd/s    kB_wr/s kB_ccwr/s iodelay         Command
      09:47:57           0        229       0.00       72.00        0.00         0    systemd-journal
      09:47:57           0        380       0.00        4.00        0.00         0    auditd
      09:47:57         0        2699        4.00        0.00        0.00        10    kworker/
      u4:1-flush-259:0
      09:47:57           0      2705    15104.00        0.00        0.00         0    tar
      09:47:57           0      2706        0.00    6912.00         0.00         0    gzip
                                                                          9.6 Observability Tools   465


Columns include:

    ■   kB_rd/s: Kilobytes read per second
    ■   kB_wd/s: Kilobytes issued for write per second
    ■   kB_ccwr/s: Kilobytes canceled for write per second (e.g., overwritten or deleted
        before flush)
    ■   iodelay: The time the process was blocked on disk I/O (clock ticks), including swapping

The workload seen in the output was a tar command reading the file system to a pipe, and
gzip reading the pipe and writing a compressed archive file. The tar reads caused iodelay
(5 clock ticks), whereas the gzip writes did not, due to write-back caching in the page cache.
Some time later the page cache was flushed, as can be seen in the second interval output by the
kworker/u4:1-flush-259:0 process, which experienced iodelay.

iodelay is a recent addition and shows the magnitude of performance issues: how much the
application waited. The other columns show the workload applied.

Note that only superusers (root) can access disk statistics for processes that they do not own.
These are read via /proc/PID/io.


9.6.5      perf
The Linux perf(1) tool (Chapter 13) can record block tracepoints. Listing them:

# perf list 'block:*'


List of pre-defined events (to be used in -e):


  block:block_bio_backmerge                                   [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_bio_bounce                                      [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_bio_complete                                    [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_bio_frontmerge                                  [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_bio_queue                                       [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_bio_remap                                       [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_dirty_buffer                                    [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_getrq                                           [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_plug                                            [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_rq_complete                                     [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_rq_insert                                       [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_rq_issue                                        [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_rq_remap                                        [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_rq_requeue                                      [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_sleeprq                                         [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_split                                           [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_touch_buffer                                    [Tracepoint event]
  block:block_unplug                                          [Tracepoint event]
466   Chapter 9 Disks


      For example, the following records block device issues with stack traces. A sleep 10 command is
      provided as the duration of tracing.

      # perf record -e block:block_rq_issue -a -g sleep 10
      [ perf record: Woken up 22 times to write data ]
      [ perf record: Captured and wrote 5.701 MB perf.data (19267 samples) ]
      # perf script --header
      [...]
      mysqld 1965 [001] 160501.158573: block:block_rq_issue: 259,0 WS 12288 () 10329704 +
      24 [mysqld]
              ffffffffb12d5040 blk_mq_start_request+0xa0 ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb12d5040 blk_mq_start_request+0xa0 ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb1532b4c nvme_queue_rq+0x16c ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb12d7b46 __blk_mq_try_issue_directly+0x116 ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb12d87bb blk_mq_request_issue_directly+0x4b ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb12d8896 blk_mq_try_issue_list_directly+0x46 ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb12dce7e blk_mq_sched_insert_requests+0xae ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb12d86c8 blk_mq_flush_plug_list+0x1e8 ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb12cd623 blk_flush_plug_list+0xe3 ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb12cd676 blk_finish_plug+0x26 ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb119771c ext4_writepages+0x77c ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb10209c3 do_writepages+0x43 ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb1017ed5 __filemap_fdatawrite_range+0xd5 ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb10186ca file_write_and_wait_range+0x5a ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb118637f ext4_sync_file+0x8f ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb1105869 vfs_fsync_range+0x49 ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb11058fd do_fsync+0x3d ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb1105944 __x64_sys_fsync+0x14 ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb0e044ca do_syscall_64+0x5a ([kernel.kallsyms])
              ffffffffb1a0008c entry_SYSCALL_64_after_hwframe+0x44 ([kernel.kallsyms])
                   7f2285d1988b fsync+0x3b (/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libpthread-2.30.so)
                   55ac10a05ebe Fil_shard::redo_space_flush+0x44e (/usr/sbin/mysqld)
                   55ac10a06179 Fil_shard::flush_file_redo+0x99 (/usr/sbin/mysqld)
                   55ac1076ff1c [unknown] (/usr/sbin/mysqld)
                   55ac10777030 log_flusher+0x520 (/usr/sbin/mysqld)
                  55ac10748d61
      std::thread::_State_impl<std::thread::_Invoker<std::tuple<Runnable, void (*)(log_t*),
      log_t*> > >::_M_run+0xc1 (/usr/sbin/mysql
                   7f228559df74 [unknown] (/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libstdc++.so.6.0.28)
                   7f226c3652c0 [unknown] ([unknown])
                  55ac107499f0
      std::thread::_State_impl<std::thread::_Invoker<std::tuple<Runnable, void (*)(log_t*),
      log_t*> > >::~_State_impl+0x0 (/usr/sbin/
              5441554156415741 [unknown] ([unknown])
      [...]
                                                                            9.6 Observability Tools     467


The output is a one-line summary for each event, followed by the stack trace that led to it. The
one-line summary begins with default fields from perf(1): the process name, thread ID, CPU
ID, timestamp, and event name (see Chapter 13, perf, Section 13.11, perf script). The remaining
fields are specific to the tracepoint: for this block:block_rq_issue tracepoint, they are, along with
the field contents:
       ■   Disk major and minor numbers: 259,0
       ■   I/O type: WS (synchronous writes)
       ■   I/O size: 12288 (bytes)
       ■   I/O command string: ()
       ■   Sector address: 10329704
       ■   Number of sectors: 24
       ■   Process: mysqld

These fields are from the format string of the tracepoint (see Chapter 4, Observability Tools,
Section 4.3.5, Tracepoints, under Tracepoints Arguments and Format String).

The stack trace can help explain the nature of the disk I/O. In this case, it is from the mysqld
log_flusher() routine that called fsync(2). The kernel code path shows it was handled by the ext4
file system, and became a disk I/O issue via blk_mq_try_issue_list_directly().

Often I/O will be queued and then issued later by a kernel thread, and tracing the block:block_
rq_issue tracepoint will not show the originating process or user-level stack trace. In those cases
you can try tracing block:block_rq_insert instead, which is for queue insertion. Note that it
misses I/O that did not queue.


One-Liners
The following one-liners demonstrate using filters with the block tracepoints.

Trace all block completions, of size at least 100 Kbytes, until Ctrl-C10:

perf record -e block:block_rq_complete --filter 'nr_sector > 200'

Trace all block completions, synchronous writes only, until Ctrl-C:

perf record -e block:block_rq_complete --filter 'rwbs == "WS"

Trace all block completions, all types of writes, until Ctrl-C:

perf record -e block:block_rq_complete --filter 'rwbs ~ "*W*"'


Disk I/O Latency
Disk I/O latency (described earlier as disk request time) can also be determined by recording both
the disk issue and completion events for later analysis. The following records them for 60 sec-
onds then writes the events to a out.disk01.txt file:


10
     With a sector size of 512 bytes, 100 Kbytes means 200 sectors.
468   Chapter 9 Disks



      perf record -e block:block_rq_issue,block:block_rq_complete -a sleep 60
      perf script --header > out.disk01.txt

      You can post-process the output file using whatever is convenient: awk(1), Perl, Python, R,
      Google Spreadsheets, etc. Associate issues with completions and use the recorded timestamps to
      calculate the latency.

      The following tools, biolatency(8) and biosnoop(8), calculate disk I/O latency efficiently in kernel
      space using a BPF program, and include the latency directly in the output.


      9.6.6 biolatency
      biolatency(8)11 is a BCC and bpftrace tool to show disk I/O latency as a histogram. The term I/O
      latency used here refers to the time from issuing a request to the device, to when it completes
      (aka disk request time).

      The following shows biolatency(8) from BCC tracing block I/O for 10 seconds:

      # biolatency 10 1
      Tracing block device I/O... Hit Ctrl-C to end.


            usecs                      : count         distribution
                 0 -> 1                : 0           |                                                      |
                 2 -> 3                : 0           |                                                      |
                 4 -> 7                : 0           |                                                      |
                 8 -> 15               : 0           |                                                      |
                16 -> 31               : 2           |                                                      |
                32 -> 63               : 0           |                                                      |
                64 -> 127              : 0           |                                                      |
               128 -> 255              : 1065        |*****************                                     |
               256 -> 511              : 2462        |****************************************|
               512 -> 1023             : 1949        |*******************************                       |
             1024 -> 2047              : 373         |******                                                |
             2048 -> 4095              : 1815        |*****************************                         |
             4096 -> 8191              : 591         |*********                                             |
             8192 -> 16383             : 397         |******                                                |
            16384 -> 32767             : 50          |                                                      |

      This output shows a bi-modal distribution, with one mode between 128 and 1023 microseconds,
      and another between 2048 and 4095 microseconds (2.0 to 4.1 milliseconds.) Now that I know
      that the device latency is bi-modal, understanding why may lead to tuning that moves more I/O
      to the faster mode. For example, the slower I/O could be random I/O or larger-sized I/O (which


      11
        Origin: I created biolatency for BCC on 20-Sep-2015 and bpftrace on 13-Sep-2018, based on an earlier iolatency
      tool I developed. I added the “b” to these tools to make it clear it refers to block I/O.
                                                                        9.6 Observability Tools      469


can be determined using other BPF tools), or different I/O flags (shown using the -F option). The
slowest I/O in this output reached the 16- to 32-millisecond range: this sounds like queueing on
the device.

The BCC version of biolatency(8) supports options including:

   ■   -m: Output in milliseconds
   ■   -Q: Include OS queued I/O time (OS request time)
   ■   -F: Show a histogram for each I/O flag set
   ■   -D: Show a histogram for each disk device

Using -Q makes biolatency(8) report the full I/O time from creation and insertion on a kernel
queue to device completion, described earlier as the block I/O request time.

The BCC biolatency(8) also accepts optional interval and count arguments, in seconds.


Per-Flag
The -F option is especially useful, breaking down the distribution for each I/O flag. For example,
with -m for millisecond histograms:

# biolatency -Fm 10 1
Tracing block device I/O... Hit Ctrl-C to end.


flags = Sync-Write
       msecs                 : count       distribution
           0 -> 1            : 2         |****************************************|


flags = Flush
       msecs                 : count       distribution
           0 -> 1            : 1         |****************************************|


flags = Write
       msecs                 : count       distribution
           0 -> 1            : 14        |****************************************|
           2 -> 3            : 1         |**                                            |
           4 -> 7            : 10        |****************************                  |
           8 -> 15           : 11        |*******************************               |
          16 -> 31           : 11        |*******************************               |


flags = NoMerge-Write
       msecs                 : count       distribution
           0 -> 1            : 95        |**********                                    |
           2 -> 3            : 152       |*****************                             |
           4 -> 7            : 266       |******************************                |
           8 -> 15           : 350       |****************************************|
          16 -> 31           : 298       |**********************************            |
470   Chapter 9 Disks


      flags = Read
            msecs                      : count         distribution
                  0 -> 1               : 11           |****************************************|


      flags = ReadAhead-Read
            msecs                      : count         distribution
                  0 -> 1               : 5261         |****************************************|
                  2 -> 3               : 1238         |*********                                             |
                  4 -> 7               : 481          |***                                                   |
                  8 -> 15              : 5            |                                                      |
                16 -> 31               : 2            |                                                      |

      These flags may be handled differently by the storage device; separating them allows us to
      study them in isolation. The previous output shows that writes were slower than reads, and can
      explain the earlier bi-modal distribution.

      biolatency(8) summarizes disk I/O latency. To examine it for each I/O, use biosnoop(8).


      9.6.7      biosnoop
      biosnoop(8)12 is a BCC and bpftrace tool that prints a one-line summary for each disk I/O. For
      example:

      # biosnoop
      TIME(s)             COMM                PID      DISK       T   SECTOR       BYTES      LAT(ms)
      0.009165000         jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174           nvme0n1 W      2116272      8192           0.43
      0.009612000         jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174           nvme0n1 W      2116288      4096           0.39
      0.011836000         mysqld              1948     nvme0n1 W      10434672     4096           0.45
      0.012363000         jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174           nvme0n1 W      2116296      8192           0.49
      0.012844000         jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174           nvme0n1 W      2116312      4096           0.43
      0.016809000         mysqld              1948     nvme0n1 W      10227712     262144         1.82
      0.017184000         mysqld              1948     nvme0n1 W      10228224     262144         2.19
      0.017679000         mysqld              1948     nvme0n1 W      10228736     262144         2.68
      0.018056000         mysqld              1948     nvme0n1 W      10229248     262144         3.05
      0.018264000         mysqld              1948     nvme0n1 W      10229760     262144         3.25
      0.018657000         mysqld              1948     nvme0n1 W      10230272     262144         3.64
      0.018954000         mysqld              1948     nvme0n1 W      10230784     262144         3.93
      0.019053000         mysqld              1948     nvme0n1 W      10231296     131072         4.03
      0.019731000         jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174           nvme0n1 W      2116320      8192           0.49
      0.020243000         jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174           nvme0n1 W      2116336      4096           0.46
      0.020593000         mysqld              1948     nvme0n1 R      4495352      4096           0.26
      [...]


      12
         Origin: I created the BCC version on 16-Sep-2015, and the bpftrace version on 15-Nov-2017, based on an earlier
      tool of mine from 2003. The full origin is described in [Gregg 19].
                                                                           9.6 Observability Tools       471


This output shows a write workload to disk nvme0n1, mostly from mysqld, PID 174, with varying
I/O sizes. The columns are:
    ■   TIME(s): I/O completion time in seconds
    ■   COMM: Process name (if known by this tool)
    ■   PID: Process ID (if known by this tool)
    ■   DISK: Storage device name
    ■   T: Type: R == reads, W == writes
    ■   SECTOR: Address on disk in units of 512-byte sectors
    ■   BYTES: Size of the I/O request
    ■   LAT(ms): Duration of the I/O from device issue to device completion (disk request time)

Around the middle of the example output is a series of 262,144 byte writes, beginning with a
latency of 1.82 ms and increasing in latency for each subsequent I/O, ending with 4.03 ms. This
is a pattern I commonly see, and the likely reason can be calculated from another column in
the output: TIME(s). If you subtract the LAT(ms) column from the TIME(s) column, you have the
starting time of the I/O, and these started around the same time. This appears to be a group of
writes that were sent at the same time, queued on the device, and then completed in turn, with
increasing latency for each.

By careful examination of the start and end times, reordering on the device can also be identified.
Since the output can many thousands of lines, I have often used the R statistical software to plot
the output as a scatter plot, to help in identifying these patterns (see Section 9.7, Visualizations).


Outlier Analysis
Here is a method for finding and analyzing latency outliers using biosnoop(8).

   1. Write the output to a file:

        # biosnoop > out.biosnoop01.txt

   2. Sort the output by the latency column, and print the last five entries (those with the high-
      est latency):

        # sort -n -k 8,8 out.biosnoop01.txt | tail -5
        31.344175     logger             10994    nvme0n1 W 15218056    262144     30.92
        31.344401     logger             10994    nvme0n1 W 15217544    262144     31.15
        31.344757     logger             10994    nvme0n1 W 15219080    262144     31.49
        31.345260     logger             10994    nvme0n1 W 15218568    262144     32.00
        46.059274     logger             10994    nvme0n1 W 15198896    4096       64.86

   3. Open the output in a text editor (e.g., vi(1) or vim(1)):

        # vi out.biosnoop01.txt
472   Chapter 9 Disks


           4. Work through the outliers from slowest to fastest, searching for the time in the first column.
              The slowest was 64.86 milliseconds, with the completion time of 46.059274 (seconds).
              Searching for 46.059274:

              [...]
              45.992419      jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174       nvme0n1 W 2107232         8192          0.45
              45.992988      jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174       nvme0n1 W 2107248         4096          0.50
              46.059274      logger           10994   nvme0n1 W 15198896        4096          64.86
              [...]

           5. Look at events that occurred prior to the outlier, to see whether they had similar latency
              and therefore this was the result of queueing (similar to the 1.82 to 4.03 ms ramp seen in
              the first biosnoop(8) example output), or for any other clues. That’s not the case here: the
              previous event was around 6 ms earlier, with a latency of 0.5 ms. The device may have
              reordered events and completed the others first. If the previous completion event was
              around 64 ms ago, then the gap in completions from the device may be explained by other
              factors: e.g., this system is a VM instance, and can be de-scheduled by the hyper visor
              during I/O, adding that time to the I/O time.


      Queued Time
      A -Q option to BCC biosnoop(8) can be used to show the time spent between the creation of the
      I/O and the issue to the device (previously called the block I/O wait time or OS wait time). This time
      is mostly spent on OS queues, but could also include memory allocation and lock acquisition.
      For example:

      # biosnoop -Q
      TIME(s)         COMM             PID     DISK      T SECTOR       BYTES    QUE(ms) LAT(ms)
      0.000000        kworker/u4:0     9491    nvme0n1 W 5726504        4096           0.06      0.60
      0.000039        kworker/u4:0     9491    nvme0n1 W 8128536        4096           0.05      0.64
      0.000084        kworker/u4:0     9491    nvme0n1 W 8128584        4096           0.05      0.68
      0.000138        kworker/u4:0     9491    nvme0n1 W 8128632        4096           0.05      0.74
      0.000231        kworker/u4:0     9491    nvme0n1 W 8128664        4096           0.05      0.83
      [...]

      The queued time is shown in the QUE(ms) column.


      9.6.8       iotop, biotop
      I wrote the first iotop in 2005 for Solaris-based systems [McDougall 06a]. There are now many
      versions, including a Linux iotop(1) tool based on kernel accounting statistics13 [Chazarain 13],
      and my own biotop(8) based on BPF.



      13
       iotop(1) requires CONFIG_TASK_DELAY_ACCT, CONFIG_TASK_IO_ACCOUNTING, CONFIG_TASKSTATS, and
      CONFIG_VM_EVENT_COUNTERS.
                                                                                  9.6 Observability Tools   473



iotop
iotop can typically be installed via an iotop package. When run without arguments, it refreshes
the screen every second, showing the top disk I/O processes. Batch mode (-b) can be used to
provide a rolling output (no screen clear); it is demonstrated here with I/O processes only (-o)
and an interval of 5 s (-d5):

# iotop -bod5
Total DISK READ:              4.78 K/s | Total DISK WRITE:               15.04 M/s
  TID      PRIO    USER     DISK READ    DISK WRITE    SWAPIN            IO    COMMAND
22400 be/4 root               4.78 K/s     0.00 B/s    0.00 % 13.76 % [flush-252:0]
  279 be/3 root               0.00 B/s 1657.27 K/s     0.00 %      9.25 % [jbd2/vda2-8]
22446 be/4 root               0.00 B/s    10.16 M/s    0.00 %      0.00 % beam.smp -K true ...
Total DISK READ:              0.00 B/s | Total DISK WRITE:               10.75 M/s
  TID      PRIO    USER     DISK READ    DISK WRITE    SWAPIN            IO    COMMAND
  279 be/3 root               0.00 B/s     9.55 M/s    0.00 %      0.01 % [jbd2/vda2-8]
22446 be/4 root               0.00 B/s    10.37 M/s    0.00 %      0.00 % beam.smp -K true ...
  646 be/4 root               0.00 B/s   272.71 B/s    0.00 %      0.00 % rsyslogd -n -c 5
[...]

The output shows the beam.smp process (Riak) performing a disk write workload of around 10
Mbytes/s. The columns include:
      ■   DISK READ: Read Kbytes/s
      ■   DISK WRITE: Write Kbytes/s
      ■   SWAPIN: Percent of time the thread spent waiting for swap-in I/O
      ■   IO: Percent of time the thread spent waiting for I/O

iotop(8) supports various other options, including -a for accumulated statistics (instead of
per-interval), -p PID to match a process, and -d SEC to set the interval.

I recommend that you test iotop(8) with a known workload and check that the numbers match.
I just tried (iotop version 0.6) and found that it greatly undercounts write workloads. You can also
use biotop(8), which uses a different instrumentation source and does match my test workload.


biotop
biotop(8) is a BCC tool, and is another top(1) for disks. Example output:

# biotop
Tracing... Output every 1 secs. Hit Ctrl-C to end


08:04:11 loadavg: 1.48 0.87 0.45 1/287 14547


PID        COMM                D MAJ MIN DISK          I/O   Kbytes       AVGms
14501      cksum               R 202 1    xvda1        361       28832     3.39
474   Chapter 9 Disks


      6961        dd                      R 202 1       xvda1    1628   13024   0.59
      13855       dd                      R 202 1       xvda1    1627   13016   0.59
      326         jbd2/xvda1-8            W 202 1       xvda1       3     168   3.00
      1880        supervise               W 202 1       xvda1       2       8   6.71
      1873        supervise               W 202 1       xvda1       2       8   2.51
      1871        supervise               W 202 1       xvda1       2       8   1.57
      1876        supervise               W 202 1       xvda1       2       8   1.22
      [...]

      This shows cksum(1) and dd(1) commands performing reads, and supervise processes performing
      some writes. This is a quick way to identify who is performing disk I/O, and by how much. The
      columns are:
             ■   PID: Cached process ID (best effort)
             ■   COMM: Cached process name (best effort)
             ■   D: Direction (R == read, W == write)
             ■   MAJ MIN: Disk major and minor numbers (a kernel identifier)
             ■   DISK: Disk name
             ■   I/O: Number of disk I/O during interval
             ■   Kbytes: Total disk throughput during interval (Kbytes)
             ■   AVGms: Average time for the I/O (latency) from the issue to the device, to its completion
                 (milliseconds)

      By the time disk I/O is issued to the device, the requesting process may no longer be on CPU, and
      identifying it can be difficult. biotop(8) uses a best-effort approach: the PID and COMM columns
      will usually match the correct process, but this is not guaranteed.

      biotop(8) supports optional interval and count columns (the default interval is one second), -C
      to not clear the screen, and -r MAXROWS to specify the top number of processes to display.


      9.6.9          biostacks
      biostacks(8)14 is a bpftrace tool that traces the block I/O request time (from OS enqueue to device
      completion) with the I/O initialization stack trace. For example:

      # biostacks.bt
      Attaching 5 probes...
      Tracing block I/O with init stacks. Hit Ctrl-C to end.
      ^C
      [...]



      14
           Origin: I created it on 19-Mar-2019 for [Gregg 19].
                                                                          9.6 Observability Tools     475


@usecs[
     blk_account_io_start+1
     blk_mq_make_request+1069
     generic_make_request+292
     submit_bio+115
     submit_bh_wbc+384
     ll_rw_block+173
     ext4_bread+102
     __ext4_read_dirblock+52
     ext4_dx_find_entry+145
     ext4_find_entry+365
     ext4_lookup+129
     lookup_slow+171
     walk_component+451
     path_lookupat+132
     filename_lookup+182
     user_path_at_empty+54
     sys_access+175
     do_syscall_64+115
     entry_SYSCALL_64_after_hwframe+61
]:
[2K, 4K)                  2 |@@                                                            |
[4K, 8K)                 37 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@|
[8K, 16K)                15 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@                                         |
[16K, 32K)                9 |@@@@@@@@@@@@                                                  |
[32K, 64K)                1 |@                                                             |

The output shows a latency histogram (in microseconds) for disk I/O, along with the requesting
I/O stack: via the access(2) syscall, filename_lookup(), and ext4_lookup(). This I/O was caused
by looking up pathnames during file permission checks. The output included many such stacks,
and these show that I/O are caused by activity other than reads and writes.

I have seen cases where there was mysterious disk I/O without any application causing it. The
reason turned out to be background file system tasks. (In one case it was ZFS’s background scrub-
ber, which periodically verifies checksums.) biostacks(8) can identify the real reason for disk I/O
by showing the kernel stack trace.


9.6.10       blktrace
blktrace(8) is a custom tracing facility for block device I/O events on Linux that uses the kernel
blktrace tracer. This is a specialized tracer controlled via BLKTRACE ioctl(2) syscalls to disk
device files. The frontend tools include blktrace(8), blkparse(1), and btrace(8).
476   Chapter 9 Disks


      blktrace(8) enables kernel block driver tracing and retrieves the raw trace data, which can be
      processed using blkparse(1). For convenience, the btrace(8) tool runs both blktrace(8) and
      blkparse(1), such that the following are equivalent:

      # blktrace -d /dev/sda -o - | blkparse -i -
      # btrace /dev/sda

      blktrace(8) is a low-level tool that shows multiple events per I/O.


      Default Output
      The following shows the default output of btrace(8) and captures a single disk read event by the
      cksum(1) command:
      # btrace /dev/sdb
        8,16    3          1      0.429604145 20442      A   R 184773879 + 8 <- (8,17) 184773816
        8,16    3          2      0.429604569 20442      Q   R 184773879 + 8 [cksum]
        8,16    3          3      0.429606014 20442      G   R 184773879 + 8 [cksum]
        8,16    3          4      0.429607624 20442      P   N [cksum]
        8,16    3          5      0.429608804 20442      I   R 184773879 + 8 [cksum]
        8,16    3          6      0.429610501 20442      U   N [cksum] 1
        8,16    3          7      0.429611912 20442      D   R 184773879 + 8 [cksum]
        8,16    1          1      0.440227144        0   C   R 184773879 + 8 [0]
      [...]

      Eight lines of output were reported for this single disk I/O, showing each action (event) involving
      the block device queue and the device.

      By default, there are seven columns:

         1. Device major, minor number

         2. CPU ID

         3. Sequence number

         4. Action time, in seconds

         5. Process ID

         6. Action identifier: the type of event (see the Action Identifiers heading)

         7. RWBS description: I/O flags (see the RWBS Description heading)

      These output columns may be customized using the -f option. They are followed by custom
      data based on the action.

      The final data depends on the action. For example, 184773879 + 8 [cksum] means an I/O at
      block address 184773879 with size 8 (sectors), from the process named cksum.
                                                                         9.6 Observability Tools      477



Action Identifiers
These are described in the blkparse(1) man page:

         A         IO was remapped to a different device
         B         IO bounced
         C         IO completion
         D         IO issued to driver
         F         IO front merged with request on queue
         G         Get request
         I         IO inserted onto request queue
         M         IO back merged with request on queue
         P         Plug request
         Q         IO handled by request queue code
         S         Sleep request
         T         Unplug due to timeout
         U         Unplug request
         X         Split

This list has been included because it also shows the events that the blktrace framework can
observe.


RWBS Description
For tracing observability, the kernel provides a way to describe the type of each I/O using a char-
acter string named rwbs. rwbs is used by blktrace(8) and other disk tracing tools. It is defined in
the kernel blk_fill_rwbs() function and uses the characters:
    ■   R: Read
    ■   W: Write
    ■   M: Metadata
    ■   S: Synchronous
    ■   A: Read-ahead
    ■   F: Flush or force unit access
    ■   D: Discard
    ■   E: Erase
    ■   N: None

The characters can be combined. For example, “WM” is for writes of metadata.
478   Chapter 9 Disks


      Action Filtering
      The blktrace(8) and btrace(8) commands can filter actions to show only the event type of interest.
      For example, to trace only the D actions (I/O issued), use the filter option -a issue:

      # btrace -a issue /dev/sdb
        8,16     1         1     0.000000000     448   D     W 38978223 + 8 [kjournald]
        8,16     1         2     0.000306181     448   D     W 104685503 + 24 [kjournald]
        8,16     1         3     0.000496706     448   D     W 104685527 + 8 [kjournald]
        8,16     1         1     0.010441458 20824     D     R 184944151 + 8 [tar]
      [...]

      Other filters are described in the blktrace(8) man page, including options to trace only reads (-a
      read), writes (-a write), or synchronous operations (-a sync).


      Analyze
      The blktrace package includes btt(1) to analyze I/O traces. Here is an example invocation, now
      using blktrace(8) on /dev/nvme0n1p1 to write trace files (a new directory is used since these
      commands create several files):

      # mkdir tracefiles; cd tracefiles
      # blktrace -d /dev/nvme0n1p1 -o out -w 10
      === nvme0n1p1 ===
        CPU    0:                 20135 events,           944 KiB data
        CPU    1:                 38272 events,        1795 KiB data
        Total:                    58407 events (dropped 0),          2738 KiB data
      # blkparse -i out.blktrace.* -d out.bin
      259,0      1         1     0.000000000    7113   A    RM 161888 + 8 <- (259,1) 159840
      259,0      1         1     0.000000000    7113   A    RM 161888 + 8 <- (259,1) 159840
      [...]
      # btt -i out.bin
      ==================== All Devices ====================


                     ALL            MIN             AVG             MAX             N
      --------------- ------------- ------------- ------------- -----------


      Q2Q                  0.000000001     0.000365336      2.186239507         24625
      Q2A                  0.000037519     0.000476609      0.001628905          1442
      Q2G                  0.000000247     0.000007117      0.006140020         15914
      G2I                  0.000001949     0.000027449      0.000081146           602
      Q2M                  0.000000139     0.000000198      0.000021066          8720
      I2D                  0.000002292     0.000008148      0.000030147           602
      M2D                  0.000001333     0.000188409      0.008407029          8720
                                                                            9.6 Observability Tools   479


D2C                     0.000195685     0.000885833     0.006083538         12308
Q2C                     0.000198056     0.000964784     0.009578213         12308
[...]

These statistics are in units of seconds, and show times for each stage of I/O processing.
Interesting times include:
      ■   Q2C: The total time from the I/O request to completion (time in block layer)
      ■   D2C: The device issue to completion (disk I/O latency)
      ■   I2D: The time from device queue insertion to device issue (request queue time)
      ■   M2D: The time from I/O merge to issue

The output shows an average D2C time of 0.86 ms, and a max M2D of 8.4 ms. Maximums such
as these can cause I/O latency outliers.

For more information, see the btt User Guide [Brunelle 08].


Visualizations
The blktrace(8) tool can record events to trace files that can be visualized using iowatcher(1),
also provided in the blktrace package, and also visualized using Chris Mason’s seekwatcher
[Mason 08].


9.6.11         bpftrace
bpftrace is a BPF-based tracer that provides a high-level programming language, allowing the
creation of powerful one-liners and short scripts. It is well suited for custom disk analysis based
on clues from other tools.

bpftrace is explained in Chapter 15. This section shows some examples for disk analysis: one-
liners, disk I/O size, and disk I/O latency.


One-Liners
The following one-liners are useful and demonstrate different bpftrace capabilities.

Count block I/O tracepoints events:

bpftrace -e 'tracepoint:block:* { @[probe] = count(); }'

Summarize block I/O size as a histogram:

bpftrace -e 't:block:block_rq_issue { @bytes = hist(args->bytes); }'

Count block I/O request user stack traces:

bpftrace -e 't:block:block_rq_issue { @[ustack] = count(); }'
bpftrace -e 't:block:block_rq_insert { @[ustack] = count(); }'
480   Chapter 9 Disks


      Count block I/O type flags:

      bpftrace -e 't:block:block_rq_issue { @[args->rwbs] = count(); }'

      Trace block I/O errors with device and I/O type:

      bpftrace -e 't:block:block_rq_complete /args->error/ {
          printf("dev %d type %s error %d\n", args->dev, args->rwbs, args->error); }'

      Count SCSI opcodes:

      bpftrace -e 't:scsi:scsi_dispatch_cmd_start { @opcode[args->opcode] =
          count(); }'

      Count SCSI result codes:

      bpftrace -e 't:scsi:scsi_dispatch_cmd_done { @result[args->result] = count(); }'

      Count SCSI driver functions:

      bpftrace -e 'kprobe:scsi* { @[func] = count(); }'



      Disk I/O Size
      Sometimes disk I/O is slow simply because it is large, especially for SSD drives. Another size-
      based issue is when an application requests many small I/O, which instead could be aggregated
      into larger sizes to reduce I/O stack overheads. Both of these issues can be investigated by exam-
      ining the I/O size distribution.

      Using bpftrace, the following shows a disk I/O size distribution broken down by the requesting
      process name:

      # bpftrace -e 't:block:block_rq_issue /args->bytes/ { @[comm] = hist(args->bytes); }'
      Attaching 1 probe...
      ^C
      [...]


      @[kworker/3:1H]:
      [4K, 8K)                   1 |@@@@@@@@@@                                                  |
      [8K, 16K)                  0 |                                                            |
      [16K, 32K)                 0 |                                                            |
      [32K, 64K)                 0 |                                                            |
      [64K, 128K)                0 |                                                            |
      [128K, 256K)               0 |                                                            |
      [256K, 512K)               0 |                                                            |
      [512K, 1M)                 5 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@|
      [1M, 2M)                   3 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@                             |
                                                                           9.6 Observability Tools       481


@[dmcrypt_write]:
[4K, 8K)                 103 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@|
[8K, 16K)                 46 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@                                        |
[16K, 32K)                11 |@@@@@                                                          |
[32K, 64K)                 0 |                                                               |
[64K, 128K)                1 |                                                               |
[128K, 256K)               1 |                                                               |

The output shows processes named dmcrypt_write performing small I/O, mostly in the 4 to
32 Kbyte range.

The tracepoint block:block_rq_issue shows when I/O were sent to the device driver for delivery to
the disk device. There is no guarantee that the originating process is still on CPU, especially if the
I/O is queued by a scheduler, so the process name shown may be for a later kernel worker thread
that reads I/O from a queue for device delivery. You can switch the tracepoint to block:block_rq_
insert to measure from the insertion of the queue, which may improve the accuracy of the process
name, but it may also miss instrumenting I/O that bypasses queueing (this was also mentioned in
Section 9.6.5, perf).

If you add args->rwbs as a histogram key, the output will be further broken down by I/O type:

# bpftrace -e 't:block:block_rq_insert /args->bytes/ { @[comm, args->rwbs] =
     hist(args->bytes); }'
Attaching 1 probe...
^C
[...]


@[dmcrypt_write, WS]:
[4K, 8K)                   4 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@|
[8K, 16K)                  1 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@                                                  |
[16K, 32K)                 0 |                                                               |
[32K, 64K)                 1 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@                                                  |
[64K, 128K)                1 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@                                                  |
[128K, 256K)               1 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@                                                  |


@[dmcrypt_write, W]:
[512K, 1M)                 8 |@@@@@@@@@@                                                     |
[1M, 2M)                  38 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@|

The output now includes W for writes, WS for synchronous writes, etc. See the earlier RWBS
Description section for an explanation of these letters.
482   Chapter 9 Disks


      Disk I/O Latency
      The disk response time, often referred to as disk I/O latency, can be measured by instrumenting
      device issue to completion events. The biolatency.bt tool does this, showing disk I/O latency as a
      histogram. For example:

      # biolatency.bt
      Attaching 4 probes...
      Tracing block device I/O... Hit Ctrl-C to end.
      ^C


      @usecs:
      [32, 64)                  2 |@                                                           |
      [64, 128)                 1 |                                                            |
      [128, 256)                1 |                                                            |
      [256, 512)               27 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@                                  |
      [512, 1K)                43 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@                   |
      [1K, 2K)                 54 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@|
      [2K, 4K)                 41 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@                     |
      [4K, 8K)                 47 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@               |
      [8K, 16K)                16 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@                                             |
      [16K, 32K)                4 |@@@                                                         |

      This output shows that I/O were typically completing between 256 microseconds and 16 milli-
      seconds (16K microseconds).

      The source code is:

      #!/usr/local/bin/bpftrace
      BEGIN
      {
                printf("Tracing block device I/O... Hit Ctrl-C to end.\n");
      }


      tracepoint:block:block_rq_issue
      {
                @start[args->dev, args->sector] = nsecs;
      }


      tracepoint:block:block_rq_complete
      /@start[args->dev, args->sector]/
      {
                @usecs = hist((nsecs - @start[args->dev, args->sector]) / 1000);
                delete(@start[args->dev, args->sector]);
      }
                                                                            9.6 Observability Tools        483


END
{
             clear(@start);
}

Measuring I/O latency requires storing a custom timestamp for the start of each I/O, and then
referring to it when the I/O has completed in order to calculate the elapsed time. When VFS
latency was measured in Chapter 8, File Systems, Section 8.6.15, bpftrace, the start timestamp
was stored in a BPF map keyed by the thread ID: that worked because the same thread ID will
be on CPU for the start and completion events. That is not the case with disk I/O, as the com-
pletion event will interrupt whatever else is on CPU. The unique ID in biolatency.bt has been
constructed from the device and sector number: it assumes that only one I/O will be in flight to
a given sector at a time.

As with the I/O size one-liner, you can add args->rwbs to the map key to break down by
I/O type.


Disk I/O Errors
I/O error status is an argument to the block:block_rq_complete tracepoint, and the following
bioerr(8) tool15 uses it to print details for I/O operations that error (a one-liner version of this was
included earlier):

#!/usr/local/bin/bpftrace


BEGIN
{
             printf("Tracing block I/O errors. Hit Ctrl-C to end.\n");
}


tracepoint:block:block_rq_complete
/args->error != 0/
{
             time("%H:%M:%S ");
             printf("device: %d,%d, sector: %d, bytes: %d, flags: %s, error: %d\n",
                   args->dev >> 20, args->dev & ((1 << 20) - 1), args->sector,
                   args->nr_sector * 512, args->rwbs, args->error);
}

Finding more information on a disk error may require lower-level disk tools, such as the next
three (MegaCli, smartctl, SCSI logging).




15
     Origin: I created it for the BPF book on 19-Mar-2019 [Gregg 19].
484   Chapter 9 Disks


      9.6.12      MegaCli
      Disk controllers (host bus adapters) consist of hardware and firmware that are external to the
      system. Operating system analysis tools, even dynamic tracers, cannot directly observe their
      internals. Sometimes their workings can be inferred by observing the input and output carefully
      (including via kernel static or dynamic instrumentation), to see how the disk controller responds
      to a series of I/O.

      There are some analysis tools for specific disk controllers, such as LSI’s MegaCli. The following
      shows recent controller events:

      # MegaCli -AdpEventLog -GetLatest 50 -f lsi.log -aALL
      # more lsi.log
      seqNum: 0x0000282f
      Time: Sat Jun 16 05:55:05 2012
      Code: 0x00000023
      Class: 0
      Locale: 0x20
      Event Description: Patrol Read complete
      Event Data:
      ===========
      None


      seqNum: 0x000027ec
      Time: Sat Jun 16 03:00:00 2012
      Code: 0x00000027
      Class: 0
      Locale: 0x20
      Event Description: Patrol Read started
      [...]

      The last two events show that a patrol read (which can affect performance) occurred between
      3:00 and 5:55 a.m. Patrol reads were mentioned in Section 9.4.3, Storage Types; they read disk
      blocks and verify their checksums.

      MegaCli has many other options, which can show the adapter information, disk device informa-
      tion, virtual device information, enclosure information, battery status, and physical errors. These
      help identify issues of configuration and errors. Even with this information, some types of issues
      can’t be analyzed easily, such as exactly why a particular I/O took hundreds of milliseconds.

      Check the vendor documentation to see what interface, if any, exists for disk controller analysis.


      9.6.13      smartctl
      The disk has logic to control disk operation, including queueing, caching, and error handling.
      Similarly to disk controllers, the internal behavior of the disk is not directly observable by the
      operating system and instead is usually inferred by observing I/O requests and their latency.
                                                                           9.6 Observability Tools      485


Many modern drives provide SMART (Self-Monitoring, Analysis and Reporting Technology)
data, which provides various health statistics. The following output of smartctl(8) on Linux
shows the sort of data available (this is accessing the first disk in a virtual RAID device, using -d
megaraid,0):

# smartctl --all -d megaraid,0 /dev/sdb
smartctl 5.40 2010-03-16 r3077 [x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu] (local build)
Copyright (C) 2002-10 by Bruce Allen, http://smartmontools.sourceforge.net


Device: SEAGATE      ST3600002SS          Version: ER62
Serial number: 3SS0LM01
Device type: disk
Transport protocol: SAS
Local Time is: Sun Jun 17 10:11:31 2012 UTC
Device supports SMART and is Enabled
Temperature Warning Disabled or Not Supported
SMART Health Status: OK


Current Drive Temperature:           23 C
Drive Trip Temperature:              68 C
Elements in grown defect list: 0
Vendor (Seagate) cache information
  Blocks sent to initiator = 3172800756
  Blocks received from initiator = 2618189622
  Blocks read from cache and sent to initiator = 854615302
  Number of read and write commands whose size <= segment size = 30848143
  Number of read and write commands whose size > segment size = 0
Vendor (Seagate/Hitachi) factory information
  number of hours powered up = 12377.45
  number of minutes until next internal SMART test = 56


Error counter log:
             Errors Corrected by                Total    Correction    Gigabytes    Total
                 ECC            rereads/       errors    algorithm     processed uncorrected
             fast | delayed rewrites         corrected invocations [10^9 bytes] errors
read:     7416197           0         0      7416197     7416197      1886.494            0
write:           0          0         0             0           0     1349.999            0
verify: 142475069            0           0   142475069    142475069    22222.134            0


Non-medium error count:           2661


SMART Self-test log
Num   Test                 Status         segment    LifeTime    LBA_first_err [SK ASC ASQ]
      Description                         number     (hours)
486   Chapter 9 Disks


      # 1   Background long      Completed        16         3                    - [-     -     -]
      # 2   Background short     Completed        16         0                    - [-     -     -]


      Long (extended) Self Test duration: 6400 seconds [106.7 minutes]

      While this is very useful, it does not have the resolution to answer questions about individual
      slow disk I/O, as kernel tracing frameworks do. The corrected errors information should be use-
      ful for monitoring, to help predict disk failure before it happens, as well as to confirm that a disk
      has failed or is failing.


      9.6.14      SCSI Logging
      Linux has a built-in facility for SCSI event logging. It can be enabled via sysctl(8) or /proc. For
      example, both of these commands set the logging to the maximum for all event types (warning:
      depending on your disk workload, this may flood your system log):

      # sysctl -w dev.scsi.logging_level=03333333333
      # echo 03333333333 > /proc/sys/dev/scsi/logging_level

      The format of the number is a bitfield that sets the logging level from 1 to 7 for 10 different event
      types (written here in octal; as hexadecimal it is 0x1b6db6db). This bitfield is defined in drivers/
      scsi/scsi_logging.h. The sg3-utils package provides a scsi_logging_level(8) tool for setting these.
      For example:

      # scsi_logging_level -s --all 3

      Example events:

      # dmesg
      [...]
      [542136.259412] sd 0:0:0:0: tag#0 Send: scmd 0x0000000001fb89dc
      [542136.259422] sd 0:0:0:0: tag#0 CDB: Test Unit Ready 00 00 00 00 00 00
      [542136.261103] sd 0:0:0:0: tag#0 Done: SUCCESS Result: hostbyte=DID_OK
      driverbyte=DRIVER_OK
      [542136.261110] sd 0:0:0:0: tag#0 CDB: Test Unit Ready 00 00 00 00 00 00
      [542136.261115] sd 0:0:0:0: tag#0 Sense Key : Not Ready [current]
      [542136.261121] sd 0:0:0:0: tag#0 Add. Sense: Medium not present
      [542136.261127] sd 0:0:0:0: tag#0 0 sectors total, 0 bytes done.
      [...]

      This can be used to help debug errors and timeouts. While timestamps are provided (the first
      column), using them to calculate I/O latency is difficult without unique identifying details.
                                                                                 9.7   Visualizations   487



9.6.15       Other Tools
Disk tools included in other chapters of this book and in BPF Performance Tools [Gregg 19] are
listed in Table 9.6.


Table 9.6     Other disk observability tools
Section          Tool             Description
7.5.1            vmstat           Virtual memory statistics including swapping
7.5.3            swapon           Swap device usage
[Gregg 19]       seeksize         Show requested I/O seek distances
[Gregg 19]       biopattern       Identify random/sequential disk access patterns
[Gregg 19]       bioerr           Trace disk errors
[Gregg 19]       mdflush          Trace md flush requests
[Gregg 19]       iosched          Summarize I/O scheduler latency
[Gregg 19]       scsilatency      Show SCSI command latency distributions
[Gregg 19]       scsiresult       Show SCSI command result codes
[Gregg 19]       nvmelatency      Summarize NVME driver command latency



Other Linux disk observability tools and sources include the following:

    ■   /proc/diskstats: High-level per-disk statistics
    ■   seekwatcher: Visualizes disk access patterns [Mason 08]

The disks vendors may have additional tools that access firmware statistics, or by installing a
debug version of the firmware.



9.7       Visualizations
There are many types of visualizations that can help in analyzing disk I/O performance. This
section demonstrates these with screenshots from various tools. See Chapter 2, Methodologies,
Section 2.10, Visualization, for a discussion about visualizations in general.


9.7.1      Line Graphs
Performance monitoring solutions commonly graph disk IOPS, throughput, and utilization
measurements over time as line graphs. This helps illustrate time-based patterns, such as
changes in load during the day, or recurring events such as file system flush intervals.

Note the metric that is graphed. Average latency can hide multi-modal distributions, and
outliers. Averages across all disk devices can hide unbalanced behavior, including single-
device outliers. Averages across long time periods can also hide shorter-term fluctuations.
488   Chapter 9 Disks


      9.7.2     Latency Scatter Plots
      Scatter plots are useful for visualizing I/O latency per-event, which may include thousands of
      events. The x-axis can show completion time, and the y-axis I/O response time (latency). The
      example in Figure 9.11 plots 1,400 I/O events from a production MySQL database server, cap-
      tured using iosnoop(8) and plotted using R.




      Figure 9.11 Scatter plot of disk read and write latency

      The scatter plot shows reads (+) and writes ( ) differently. Other dimensions could be plotted, for
                                                   °
      example, disk block address on the y-axis instead of latency.

      A couple of read outliers can be seen here, with latencies over 150 ms. The reason for these
      outliers was previously not known. This scatter plot, and others that included similar outliers,
      showed that they occur after a burst of writes. The writes have low latency since they returned
      from a RAID controller write-back cache, which will write them to the device after returning the
      completions. I suspect that the reads are queueing behind the device writes.

      This scatter plot showed a single server for a few seconds. Multiple servers or longer intervals can
      capture many more events, which when plotted merge together and become difficult to read. At
      that point, consider using a latency heat map.


      9.7.3 Latency Heat Maps
      A heat map can be used to visualize latency, placing the passage of time on the x-axis, the I/O
      latency on the y-axis, and the number of I/O in a particular time and latency range on the z-axis,
      shown by color (darker means more). Heat maps were introduced in Chapter 2, Methodologies,
      Section 2.10.3, Heat Maps. An interesting disk example is shown in Figure 9.12.

      The workload visualized was experimental: I was applying sequential reads to multiple disks one
      by one to explore bus and controller limits. The resulting heat map was unexpected (it has been
      described as a pterodactyl) and shows the information that would be missed when only consid-
      ering averages. There are technical reasons for each of the details seen: e.g., the “beak” ends at
      eight disks, equal to the number of SAS ports connected (two x4 ports) and the “head” begins at
      nine disks once those ports begin suffering contention.

      I invented latency heat maps to visualize latency over time, inspired by taztool, described in the next
      section. Figure 9.12 is from Analytics in the Sun Microsystems ZFS Storage appliance [Gregg 10a]:
      I collected this and other interesting latency heat maps to share publicly and promote their use.
                                                                              9.7   Visualizations   489




Figure 9.12 Disk latency pterodactyl

The x- and y-axis are the same as a latency scatter plot. The main advantage of heat maps is that
they can scale to millions of events, whereas the scatter plot becomes “paint.” This problem was
discussed in Sections 2.10.2, Scatter Plots, and 2.10.3, Heat Maps.


9.7.4    Offset Heat Maps
I/O location, or offset, can also be visualized as a heat map (and predates latency heat maps in
computing). Figure 9.13 shows an example.




Figure 9.13 DTraceTazTool
490   Chapter 9 Disks


      Disk offset (block address) is shown on the y-axis, and time on the x-axis. Each pixel is colored
      based on the number of I/O that fell in that time and latency range, darker colors for larger num-
      bers. The workload visualized was a file system archive, which creeps across the disk from block 0.
      Darker lines indicate a sequential I/O, and lighter clouds indicate random I/O.

      This visualization was introduced in 1995 with taztool by Richard McDougall. This screenshot
      is from DTraceTazTool, a version I wrote in 2006. Disk I/O offset heat maps are available from
      multiple tools, including seekwatcher (Linux).


      9.7.5 Utilization Heat Maps
      Per-device utilization may also be shown as a heat map, so that device utilization balance and
      individual outliers can be identified [Gregg 11b]. In this case percent utilization is on the y-axis,
      and darker means more disks at that utilization level. This heat map type can be useful for iden-
      tifying single hot disks, including sloth disks, as lines at the top of the heat map (100%). For an
      example utilization heat map see Chapter 6, CPUs, Section 6.7.1, Utilization Heat Map.



      9.8 Experimentation
      This section describes tools for actively testing disk I/O performance. See Section 9.5.9, Micro-
      Benchmarking, for a suggested methodology to follow.

      When using these tools, it’s a good idea to leave iostat(1) continually running so that any result
      can be immediately double-checked. Some micro-benchmarking tools may require a “direct”
      mode of operation to bypass the file system cache, and focus on disk device performance.


      9.8.1     Ad Hoc
      The dd(1) command (device-to-device copy) can be used to perform ad hoc tests of sequential
      disk performance. For example, testing sequential read with a 1 Mbyte I/O size:

      # dd if=/dev/sda1 of=/dev/null bs=1024k count=1k
      1024+0 records in
      1024+0 records out
      1073741824 bytes (1.1 GB) copied, 7.44024 s, 144 MB/s

      Since the kernel can cache and buffer data, the dd(1) measured throughput can be of the cache
      and disk and not the disk alone. To test only the disk’s performance, you can use a character
      special device for the disk: On Linux, the raw(8) command (where available) can create these
      under /dev/raw. Sequential write can be tested similarly; however, beware of destroying all data
      on disk, including the master boot record and partition table!

      A safer approach is to use the direct I/O flag with dd(1) and file system files instead of disk
      devices. Bear in mind that the test now includes some file system overheads. For example, doing
      a write test to a file called out1:
                                                                               9.8   Experimentation      491



# dd if=/dev/zero of=out1 bs=1024k count=1000 oflag=direct
1000+0 records in
1000+0 records out
1048576000 bytes (1.0 GB, 1000 MiB) copied, 1.79189 s, 585 MB/s

iostat(1) in another terminal session confirmed that the disk I/O write throughput was around
585 Mbytes/sec.

Use iflag=direct for direct I/O with input files.


9.8.2       Custom Load Generators
To test custom workloads, you can write your own load generator and measure resulting perfor-
mance using iostat(1). A custom load generator can be a short C program that opens the device
path and applies the intended workload. On Linux, the block special devices files can be opened
with O_DIRECT, to avoid buffering. If you use higher-level languages, try to use system-level
interfaces that avoid library buffering (e.g., sysread() in Perl) at least, and preferably avoid kernel
buffering as well (e.g., O_DIRECT).


9.8.3     Micro-Benchmark Tools
Available disk benchmark tools include, for example, hdparm(8) on Linux:

# hdparm -Tt /dev/sdb


/dev/sdb:
 Timing cached reads:        16718 MB in    2.00 seconds = 8367.66 MB/sec
 Timing buffered disk reads:        846 MB in    3.00 seconds = 281.65 MB/sec

The -T option tests cached reads, and -t tests disk device reads. The results show the dramatic
difference between on-disk cache hits and misses.

Study the tool documentation to understand any caveats, and see Chapter 12, Benchmarking,
for more background on micro-benchmarking. Also see Chapter 8, File Systems, for tools that
test disk performance via the file system (for which many more are available).


9.8.4     Random Read Example
As an example experiment, I wrote a custom tool to perform a random 8 Kbyte read workload of
a disk device path. From one to five instances of the tool were run concurrently, with iostat(1)
running. The write columns, which contained zeros, have been removed:

Device:      rrqm/s        r/s      rkB/s   avgrq-sz      aqu-sz r_await     svctm   %util
sda          878.00     234.00   2224.00        19.01       1.00      4.27    4.27 100.00
[...]
492   Chapter 9 Disks


      Device:     rrqm/s          r/s     rkB/s   avgrq-sz    aqu-sz r_await       svctm   %util
      sda        1233.00     311.00     3088.00      19.86        2.00      6.43    3.22 100.00
      [...]
      Device:     rrqm/s          r/s     rkB/s   avgrq-sz    aqu-sz r_await       svctm   %util
      sda        1366.00     358.00     3448.00      19.26        3.00      8.44    2.79 100.00
      [...]
      Device:     rrqm/s          r/s     rkB/s   avgrq-sz    aqu-sz r_await       svctm   %util
      sda        1775.00     413.00     4376.00      21.19        4.01      9.66    2.42 100.00
      [...]
      Device:     rrqm/s          r/s     rkB/s   avgrq-sz    aqu-sz r_await       svctm   %util
      sda        1977.00     423.00     4800.00      22.70        5.04     12.08    2.36 100.00

      Note the stepped increases in aqu-sz, and the increased latency of r_await.


      9.8.5     ioping
      ioping(1) is an interesting disk micro-benchmark tool that resembles the ICMP ping(8) utility.
      Running ioping(1) on the nvme0n1 disk device:

      # ioping /dev/nvme0n1
      4 KiB <<< /dev/nvme0n1 (block device 8 GiB): request=1 time=438.7 us (warmup)
      4 KiB <<< /dev/nvme0n1 (block device 8 GiB): request=2 time=421.0 us
      4 KiB <<< /dev/nvme0n1 (block device 8 GiB): request=3 time=449.4 us
      4 KiB <<< /dev/nvme0n1 (block device 8 GiB): request=4 time=412.6 us
      4 KiB <<< /dev/nvme0n1 (block device 8 GiB): request=5 time=468.8 us
      ^C
      --- /dev/nvme0n1 (block device 8 GiB) ioping statistics ---
      4 requests completed in 1.75 ms, 16 KiB read, 2.28 k iops, 8.92 MiB/s
      generated 5 requests in 4.37 s, 20 KiB, 1 iops, 4.58 KiB/s
      min/avg/max/mdev = 412.6 us / 437.9 us / 468.8 us / 22.4 us

      By default ioping(1) issues a 4 Kbyte read per second and prints its I/O latency in microseconds.
      When terminated, various statistics are printed.

      What makes ioping(1) different to other benchmark tools is that its workload is lightweight.
      Here is some iostat(1) output while ioping(1) was running:

      $ iostat -xsz 1
      [...]
      Device                tps         kB/s      rqm/s   await aqu-sz      areq-sz   %util
      nvme0n1              1.00         4.00      0.00     0.00     0.00       4.00    0.40

      The disk was driven to only 0.4% utilization. ioping(1) could possibly be used to debug issues in
      production environments where other micro-benchmarks would be unsuitable, as they typically
      drive the target disks to 100% utilization.
                                                                                         9.9    Tuning   493



9.8.6       fio
The flexible IO tester (fio) is a file system benchmark tool that can also shed light on disk device
performance, especially when used with the --direct=true option to use non-buffered I/O
(when non-buffered I/O is supported by the file system). It was introduced in Chapter 8, File
Systems, Section 8.7.2, Micro-Benchmark Tools.


9.8.7      blkreplay
The block I/O replay tool (blkreplay) can replay block I/O loads captured with blktrace (Section
9.6.10, blktrace) or Windows DiskMon [Schöbel-Theuer 12]. This can be useful when debugging
disk issues that are difficult to reproduce with micro-benchmark tools.

See Chapter 12, Benchmarking, Section 12.2.3, replay, for an example of how disk I/O replays
can be misleading if the target system has changed.



9.9        Tuning
Many tuning approaches were covered in Section 9.5, Methodology, including cache tuning,
scaling, and workload characterization, which can help you identify and eliminate unnecessary
work. Another important area of tuning is the storage configuration, which can be studied as
part of a static performance tuning methodology.

The following sections show areas that can be tuned: the operating system, disk devices, and
disk controller. Available tunable parameters vary between versions of an operating system,
models of disks, disk controllers, and their firmware; see their respective documentation. While
changing tunables can be easy to do, the default settings are usually reasonable and rarely need
much adjusting.


9.9.1      Operating System Tunables
These include ionice(1), resource controls, and kernel tunable parameters.


ionice
On Linux, the ionice(1) command can be used to set an I/O scheduling class and priority for a
process. The scheduling classes are identified numerically:
    ■   0, none: No class specified, so the kernel will pick a default—best effort, with a priority
        based on the process nice value.
    ■   1, real-time: Highest-priority access to the disk. If misused, this can starve other processes
        (just like the RT CPU scheduling class).
    ■   2, best effort: Default scheduling class, supporting priorities 0–7, with 0 being the
        highest.
    ■   3, idle: Disk I/O allowed only after a grace period of disk idleness.
494   Chapter 9 Disks


      Example usage:

      # ionice -c 3 -p 1623

      This puts process ID 1623 in the idle I/O scheduling class. This may be desirable for long-running
      backup jobs so that they are less likely to interfere with the production workload.


      Resource Controls
      Modern operating systems provide resource controls for managing disk or file system I/O usage
      in custom ways.

      For Linux, the container groups (cgroups) block I/O (blkio) subsystem provides storage device
      resource controls for processes or process groups. This can be a proportional weight (like a
      share) or a fixed limit. Limits can be set for read and write independently, and for either IOPS or
      throughput (bytes per second). For more detail, see Chapter 11, Cloud Computing.


      Tunable Parameters
      Example Linux tunables include:

          ■   /sys/block/*/queue/scheduler: To select the I/O scheduler policy: these may include
              noop, deadline, cfq, etc. See the earlier descriptions of these in Section 9.4, Architecture.
          ■   /sys/block/*/queue/nr_requests: The number of read or write requests that can be
              allocated by the block layer.
          ■   /sys/block/*/queue/read_ahead_kb: Maximum read ahead Kbytes for file systems to
              request.

      As with other kernel tunables, check the documentation for the full list, descriptions, and
      warnings. In the Linux source, see Documentation/block/queue-sysfs.txt.


      9.9.2       Disk Device Tunables
      On Linux, the hdparm(8) tool can set various disk device tunables, including power management
      and spindown timeouts [Archlinux 20]. Be very careful when using this tool and study the
      hdparm(8) man page—various options are marked “DANGEROUS” because they can result in
      data loss.


      9.9.3      Disk Controller Tunables
      The available disk controller tunable parameters depend on the disk controller model and
      vendor. To give you an idea of what these may include, the following shows some of the settings
      from a Dell PERC 6 card, viewed using the MegaCli command:

      # MegaCli -AdpAllInfo -aALL
      [...]
      Predictive Fail Poll Interval           : 300sec
      Interrupt Throttle Active Count         : 16
                                                                                    9.10   Exercises   495


Interrupt Throttle Completion          : 50us
Rebuild Rate                           : 30%
PR Rate                                : 0%
BGI Rate                               : 1%
Check Consistency Rate                 : 1%
Reconstruction Rate                    : 30%
Cache Flush Interval                   : 30s
Max Drives to Spinup at One Time : 2
Delay Among Spinup Groups              : 12s
Physical Drive Coercion Mode           : 128MB
Cluster Mode                           : Disabled
Alarm                                  : Disabled
Auto Rebuild                           : Enabled
Battery Warning                        : Enabled
Ecc Bucket Size                        : 15
Ecc Bucket Leak Rate                   : 1440 Minutes
Load Balance Mode                      : Auto
[...]

Each setting has a reasonably descriptive name and is described in more detail in the vendor
documentation.



9.10         Exercises
1. Answer the following questions about disk terminology:
   ■   What are IOPS?
   ■   What is the difference between service time and wait time?
   ■   What is disk I/O wait time?
   ■   What is a latency outlier?
   ■   What is a non-data-transfer disk command?

2. Answer the following conceptual questions:
   ■   Describe disk utilization and saturation.
   ■   Describe the performance differences between random and sequential disk I/O.
   ■   Describe the role of an on-disk cache for read and write I/O.

3. Answer the following deeper questions:
   ■   Explain why utilization (percent busy) of virtual disks can be misleading.
   ■   Explain why the “I/O wait” metric can be misleading.
   ■   Describe performance characteristics of RAID-0 (striping) and RAID-1 (mirroring).
496   Chapter 9 Disks


         ■   Describe what happens when disks are overloaded with work, including the effect on appli-
             cation performance.
         ■   Describe what happens when the storage controller is overloaded with work (either
             throughput or IOPS), including the effect on application performance.

      4. Develop the following procedures for your operating system:
         ■   A USE method checklist for disk resources (disks and controllers). Include how to fetch
             each metric (e.g., which command to execute) and how to interpret the result. Try to use
             existing OS observability tools before installing or using additional software products.
         ■   A workload characterization checklist for disk resources. Include how to fetch each metric,
             and try to use existing OS observability tools first.

      5. Describe disk behavior visible in this Linux iostat(1) output alone:

         $ iostat -x 1
         [...]
         avg-cpu:    %user      %nice %system %iowait     %steal     %idle
                       3.23      0.00     45.16   31.18     0.00     20.43


         Device:            rrqm/s   wrqm/s         r/s      w/s      rkB/s     wkB/s avgrq-sz
         avgqu-sz      await r_await w_await      svctm   %util
         vda                   39.78 13156.99 800.00 151.61         3466.67 41200.00     93.88
         11.99      7.49       0.57   44.01   0.49 46.56
         vdb                    0.00       0.00      0.00    0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00
         0.00      0.00       0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00

      6. (optional, advanced) Develop a tool to trace all disk commands except for reads and writes.
         This may require tracing at the SCSI level.



      9.11 References
         [Patterson 88] Patterson, D., Gibson, G., and Kats, R., “A Case for Redundant Arrays of
         Inexpensive Disks,” ACM SIGMOD, 1988.

         [McDougall 06a] McDougall, R., Mauro, J., and Gregg, B., Solaris Performance and Tools:
         DTrace and MDB Techniques for Solaris 10 and OpenSolaris, Prentice Hall, 2006.

         [Brunelle 08] Brunelle, A., “btt User Guide,” blktrace package, /usr/share/doc/blktrace/btt.
         pdf, 2008.

         [Gregg 08] Gregg, B., “Shouting in the Datacenter,” https://www.youtube.com/
         watch?v=tDacjrSCeq4, 2008.

         [Mason 08] Mason, C., “Seekwatcher,” https://oss.oracle.com/~mason/seekwatcher, 2008.

         [Smith 09] Smith, R., “Western Digital’s Advanced Format: The 4K Sector Transition Begins,”
         https://www.anandtech.com/show/2888, 2009.
                                                                             9.11     References   497


[Gregg 10a] Gregg, B., “Visualizing System Latency,” Communications of the ACM, July 2010.

[Love 10] Love, R., Linux Kernel Development, 3rd Edition, Addison-Wesley, 2010.

[Turner 10] Turner, J., “Effects of Data Center Vibration on Compute System Performance,”
USENIX SustainIT, 2010.

[Gregg 11b] Gregg, B., “Utilization Heat Maps,” http://www.brendangregg.com/HeatMaps/
utilization.html, published 2011.

[Cassidy 12] Cassidy, C., “SLC vs MLC: Which Works Best for High-Reliability Applications?”
https://www.eetimes.com/slc-vs-mlc-which-works-best-for-high-reliability-applications/#,
2012.

[Cornwell 12] Cornwell, M., “Anatomy of a Solid-State Drive,” Communications of the ACM,
December 2012.

[Schöbel-Theuer 12] Schöbel-Theuer, T., “blkreplay - a Testing and Benchmarking Toolkit,”
http://www.blkreplay.org, 2012.

[Chazarain 13] Chazarain, G., “Iotop,” http://guichaz.free.fr/iotop, 2013.

[Corbet 13b] Corbet, J., “The multiqueue block layer,” LWN.net, https://lwn.net/
Articles/552904, 2013.

[Leventhal 13] Leventhal, A., “A File System All Its Own,” ACM Queue, March 2013.

[Cai 15] Cai, Y., Luo, Y., Haratsch, E. F., Mai, K., and Mutlu, O., “Data Retention in MLC
NAND Flash Memory: Characterization, Optimization, and Recovery,” IEEE 21st International
Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), 2015.
https://users.ece.cmu.edu/~omutlu/pub/flash-memory-data-retention_hpca15.pdf

[FICA 18] “Industry’s Fastest Storage Networking Speed Announced by Fibre Channel
Industry Association—64GFC and Gen 7 Fibre Channel,” Fibre Channel Industry Association,
https://fibrechannel.org/industrys-fastest-storage-networking-speed-announced-by-fibre-
channel-industry-association-%E2%94%80-64gfc-and-gen-7-fibre-channel, 2018.

[Hady 18] Hady, F., “Achieve Consistent Low Latency for Your Storage-Intensive Workloads,”
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/architecture-and-technology/optane-technology/
low-latency-for-storage-intensive-workloads-article-brief.html, 2018.

[Gregg 19] Gregg, B., BPF Performance Tools: Linux System and Application Observability,
Addison-Wesley, 2019.

[Archlinux 20] “hdparm,” https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Hdparm, last updated
2020.

[Dell 20] “PowerEdge RAID Controller,” https://www.dell.com/support/article/en-us/
sln312338/poweredge-raid-controller?lang=en, accessed 2020.

[FCIA 20] “Features,” Fibre Channel Industry Association, https://fibrechannel.org/
fibre-channel-features, accessed 2020.

[Liu 20] Liu, L., “Samsung QVO vs EVO vs PRO: What’s the Difference? [Clone Disk],”
https://www.partitionwizard.com/clone-disk/samsung-qvo-vs-evo.html, 2020.
498   Chapter 9 Disks


        [Mellor 20] Mellor, C., “Western Digital Shingled Out in Lawsuit for Sneaking RAID-
        unfriendly Tech into Drives for RAID arrays,” TheRegister, https://www.theregister.com/
        2020/05/29/wd_class_action_lawsuit, 2020.

        [Netflix 20] “Open Connect Appliances,” https://openconnect.netflix.com/en/appliances,
        accessed 2020.

        [NVMe 20] “NVM Express,” https://nvmexpress.org, accessed 2020.
                                                     Chapter 10
                                                                     Network


As systems become more distributed, especially with cloud computing environments, the
network plays a bigger role in performance. Common tasks in network performance include
improving network latency and throughput, and eliminating latency outliers, which can be
caused by dropped or delayed packets.

Network analysis spans hardware and software. The hardware is the physical network, which
includes the network interface cards, switches, routers, and gateways (these typically have
software, too). The software is the kernel network stack including network device drivers, packet
queues, and packet schedulers, and the implementation of network protocols. Lower-level pro-
tocols are typically kernel software (IP, TCP, UDP, etc.) and higher-level protocols are typically
library or application software (e.g., HTTP).

The network is often blamed for poor performance given the potential for congestion and its
inherent complexity (blame the unknown). This chapter will show how to figure out what is
really happening, which may exonerate the network so that analysis can move on.

The learning objectives of this chapter are:

    ■   Understand networking models and concepts.
    ■   Understand different measures of network latency.
    ■   Have a working knowledge of common network protocols.
    ■   Become familiar with network hardware internals.
    ■   Become familiar with the kernel path from sockets and devices.
    ■   Follow different methodologies for network analysis.
    ■   Characterize system-wide and per-process network I/O.
    ■   Identify issues caused by TCP retransmits.
    ■   Investigate network internals using tracing tools.
    ■   Become aware of network tunable parameters.
500   Chapter 10 Network


      This chapter consists of six parts, the first three providing the basis for network analysis, and the
      last three showing its practical application to Linux-based systems. The parts are as follows:
          ■   Background introduces network-related terminology, models, and key network
              performance concepts.
          ■   Architecture provides generic descriptions of physical network components and the
              network stack.
          ■   Methodology describes performance analysis methodologies, both observational and
              experimental.
          ■   Observability Tools shows network performance observability tools for Linux-based
              systems.
          ■   Experimentation summarizes network benchmark and experiment tools.
          ■   Tuning describes example tunable parameters.

      Network basics, such as the role of TCP and IP, are assumed knowledge for this chapter.



      10.1         Terminology
      For reference, network-related terminology used in this chapter includes:

          ■   Interface: The term interface port refers to the physical network connector. The term
              interface or link refers to the logical instance of a network interface port, as seen and con-
              figured by the OS. (Not all OS interfaces are backed by hardware: some are virtual.)
          ■   Packet: The term packet refers to a message in a packet-switched network, such as IP
              packets.
          ■   Frame: A physical network-level message, for example an Ethernet frame.
          ■   Socket: An API originating from BSD for network endpoints.
          ■   Bandwidth: The maximum rate of data transfer for the network type, usually measured
              in bits per second. “100 GbE” is Ethernet with a bandwidth of 100 Gbits/s. There may be
              bandwidth limits for each direction, so a 100 GbE may be capable of 100 Gbits/s transmit
              and 100 Gbit/s receive in parallel (200 Gbit/sec total throughput).
          ■   Throughput: The current data transfer rate between the network endpoints, measured in
              bits per second or bytes per second.
          ■   Latency: Network latency can refer to the time it takes for a message to make a round-trip
              between endpoints, or the time required to establish a connection (e.g., TCP handshake),
              excluding the data transfer time that follows.

      Other terms are introduced throughout this chapter. The Glossary includes basic terminology
      for reference, including client, Ethernet, host, IP, RFC, server, SYN, ACK. Also see the terminology
      sections in Chapters 2 and 3.
                                                                                   10.2    Models   501



10.2       Models
The following simple models illustrate some basic principles of networking and network perfor-
mance. Section 10.4, Architecture, digs much deeper, including implementation-specific details.


10.2.1      Network Interface
A network interface is an operating system endpoint for network connections; it is an abstraction
configured and managed by the system administrators.




Figure 10.1 Network interface

A network interface is pictured in Figure 10.1. Network interfaces are mapped to physical
network ports as part of their configuration. Ports connect to the network and typically have
separate transmit and receive channels.


10.2.2      Controller
A network interface card (NIC) provides one or more network ports for the system and houses a
network controller: a microprocessor for transferring packets between the ports and the system
I/O transport. An example controller with four ports is pictured in Figure 10.2, showing the
physical components involved.




Figure 10.2 Network controller
502   Chapter 10 Network


      The controller is typically provided as a separate expansion card or is built into the system
      board. (Other options include via USB.)


      10.2.3            Protocol Stack
      Networking is accomplished by a stack of protocols, each layer of which serves a particular
      purpose. Two stack models are shown in Figure 10.3, with example protocols.




      Figure 10.3 Network protocol stacks

      Lower layers are drawn wider to indicate protocol encapsulation. Sent messages move down the
      stack from the application to the physical network. Received messages move up.

      Note that the Ethernet standard also describes the physical layer, and how copper or fiber is
      used.

      There may be additional layers, for example, if Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) or Linux
      WireGuard are in use, they are above the Internet layer to provide security between IP end-
      points. Also, if tunneling is in use (e.g., Virtual Extensible LAN (VXLAN)), then one protocol
      stack may be encapsulated in another.

      While the TCP/IP stack has become standard, I think it can be useful to briefly consider the OSI
      model as well, as it shows protocol layers within the application.1 The “layer” terminology is
      from OSI, where Layer 3 refers to the network protocols.

      Messages at different layers also use different terminology. Using the OSI model: at the transport
      layer a message is a segment or datagram; at the network layer a message is a packet; and at the data
      link layer a message is a frame.




      1
          I think it’s worthwhile to briefly consider it; I would not include it in a networking knowledge test.
                                                                                    10.3    Concepts   503



10.3        Concepts
The following are a selection of important concepts in networking and network performance.


10.3.1      Networks and Routing
A network is a group of connected hosts, related by network protocol addresses. Having multiple
networks—instead of one giant worldwide network—is desirable for a number of reasons, partic-
ularly scalability. Some network messages will be broadcast to all neighboring hosts. By creating
smaller subnetworks, such broadcast messages can be isolated locally so they do not create a
flooding problem at scale. This is also the basis for isolating the transmission of regular messages
to only the networks between source and destination, making more efficient usage of network
infrastructure.

Routing manages the delivery of messages, called packets, across these networks. The role of
routing is pictured in Figure 10.4.




Figure 10.4 Networks connected via routers

From the perspective of host A, the localhost is host A itself. All other hosts pictured are remote
hosts.

Host A can connect to host B via the local network, usually driven by a network switch (see
Section 10.4, Architecture). Host A can connect to host C via router 1, and to host D via routers
1, 2, and 3. Since network components such as routers are shared, contention from other traffic
(e.g., host C to host E) can hurt performance.

Connections between pairs of hosts involve unicast transmission. Multicast transmission allows a
sender to transmit to multiple destinations simultaneously, which may span multiple networks.
This must be supported by the router configuration to allow delivery. In public cloud environ-
ments it may be blocked.

Apart from routers, a typical network will also use firewalls to improve security, blocking
unwanted connections between hosts.

The address information needed to route packets is contained in an IP header.
504   Chapter 10 Network


      10.3.2      Protocols
      Network protocol standards, such as those for IP, TCP, and UDP, are a necessary requirement for
      communication between systems and devices. Communication is performed by transferring
      routable messages called packets, typically by encapsulation of payload data.

      Network protocols have different performance characteristics, arising from the original protocol
      design, extensions, or special handling by software or hardware. For example, the different
      versions of the IP protocol, IPv4 and IPv6, may be processed by different kernel code paths
      and can exhibit different performance characteristics. Other protocols perform differently by
      design, and may be selected when they suit the workload: examples include Stream Control
      Transmission Protocol (SCTP), Multipath TCP (MPTCP), and QUIC.

      Often, there are also system tunable parameters that can affect protocol performance, by chang-
      ing settings such as buffer sizes, algorithms, and various timers. These differences for specific
      protocols are described in later sections.

      Protocols typically transmit data by use of encapsulation.


      10.3.3      Encapsulation
      Encapsulation adds metadata to a payload at the start (a header), at the end (a footer), or both.
      This doesn’t change the payload data, though it does increase the total size of the message
      slightly, which costs some overhead for transmission.

      Figure 10.5 shows an example of encapsulation for a TCP/IP stack with Ethernet.




      Figure 10.5 Network protocol encapsulation

      E.H. is the Ethernet header, and E.F. is the optional Ethernet footer.


      10.3.4      Packet Size
      The size of the packets and their payload affect performance, with larger sizes improving
      throughput and reducing packet overheads. For TCP/IP and Ethernet, packets can be between
      54 and 9,054 bytes, including the 54 bytes (or more, depending on options or version) of proto-
      col headers.

      Packet size is usually limited by the network interface maximum transmission unit (MTU) size,
      which for many Ethernet networks is configured to be 1,500 bytes. The origin of the 1500 MTU
      size was from the early versions of Ethernet, and the need to balance factors such as NIC buffer
                                                                                10.3    Concepts    505


memory cost and transmission latency [Nosachev 20]. Hosts competed to use a shared medium
(coax or an Ethernet hub), and larger sizes increased the latency for hosts to wait their turn.

Ethernet now supports larger packets (frames) of up to approximately 9,000 bytes, termed jumbo
frames. These can improve network throughput performance, as well as the latency of data trans-
fers, by requiring fewer packets.

The confluence of two components has interfered with the adoption of jumbo frames: older
network hardware and misconfigured firewalls. Older hardware that does not support jumbo
frames can either fragment the packet using the IP protocol (causing a performance cost for the
packet reassembly) or respond with an ICMP “can’t fragment” error, letting the sender know to
reduce the packet size. Now the misconfigured firewalls come into play: there have been ICMP-
based attacks in the past (including the “ping of death”) to which some firewall administrators
have responded by blocking all ICMP. This prevents the helpful “can’t fragment” messages from
reaching the sender and causes network packets to be silently dropped once their packet size
increases beyond 1,500. If the ICMP message is received and fragmentation occurs, there is
also the risk of fragmented packets getting dropped by devices that do not support them. To
avoid these problems, many systems stick to the 1,500 MTU default.

The performance of 1,500 MTU frames has been improved by network interface card features,
including TCP offload and large segment offload. These send larger buffers to the network card,
which can then split them into smaller frames using dedicated and optimized hardware. This
has, to some degree, narrowed the gap between 1,500 and 9,000 MTU network performance.


10.3.5      Latency
Latency is an important metric for network performance and can be measured in different ways,
including name resolution latency, ping latency, connection latency, first-byte latency, round-
trip time, and connection life span. These are described as measured by a client connecting to a
server.


Name Resolution Latency
When establishing connections to remote hosts, a host name is usually resolved to an IP address,
for example, by DNS resolution. The time this takes can be measured separately as name resolu-
tion latency. Worst case for this latency involves name resolution time-outs, which can take tens
of seconds.

Operating systems often provide a name resolution service that provides caching, so that
subsequent DNS lookups can resolve quickly from a cache. Sometimes applications only use IP
addresses and not names, and so DNS latency is avoided entirely.


Ping Latency
This is the time for an ICMP echo request to echo response, as measured by the ping(1) command.
This time is used to measure network latency between hosts, including hops in between, and
is measured as the time needed for a network request to make a round-trip. It is in common use
because it is simple and often readily available: many operating systems will respond to ping by
506   Chapter 10 Network


      default. It may not exactly reflect the round-trip time of application requests, as ICMP may be
      handled with a different priority by routers.

      Example ping latencies are shown in Table 10.1.


      Table 10.1    Example ping latencies
      From                  To                           Via            Latency         Scaled
      Localhost             Localhost                    Kernel         0.05 ms         1s
      Host                  Host (same subnet)           10 GbE         0.2 ms          4s
      Host                  Host (same subnet)           1 GbE          0.6 ms          12 s
      Host                  Host (same subnet)           Wi-Fi          3 ms            1 minute
      San Francisco         New York                     Internet       40 ms           13 minutes
      San Francisco         United Kingdom               Internet       81 ms           27 minutes
      San Francisco         Australia                    Internet       183 ms          1 hour



      To better illustrate the orders of magnitude involved, the Scaled column shows a comparison
      based on an imaginary localhost ping latency of one second.


      Connection Latency
      Connection latency is the time to establish a network connection, before any data is transferred.
      For TCP connection latency, this is the TCP handshake time. Measured from the client, it is the time
      from sending the SYN to receiving the corresponding SYN-ACK. Connection latency might be
      better termed connection establishment latency to clearly differentiate it from connection life span.

      Connection latency is similar to ping latency, although it exercises more kernel code to establish
      a connection and includes time to retransmit any dropped packets. The TCP SYN packet, in par-
      ticular, can be dropped by the server if its backlog is full, causing the client to send a timer-based
      retransmit of the SYN. This occurs during the TCP handshake, so connection latency can
      include retransmission latency, adding one or more seconds.

      Connection latency is followed by first-byte latency.


      First-Byte Latency
      Also known as time to first byte (TTFB), first-byte latency is the time from when the connection
      has been established to when the first byte of data is received. This includes the time for the
      remote host to accept a connection, schedule the thread that services it, and for that thread to
      execute and send the first byte.

      While ping and connection latency measures the latency incurred by the network, first-byte
      latency includes the think time of the target server. This may include latency if the server is
      overloaded and needs time to process the request (e.g., TCP backlog) and to schedule the server
      (CPU scheduler latency).
                                                                                  10.3   Concepts     507



Round-Trip Time
Round-trip time (RTT) describes the time needed for a network request to make a round trip
between the endpoints. This includes the signal propagation time and the processing time at
each network hop. The intended use is to determine the latency of the network, so ideally RTT
is dominated by the time that the request and reply packets spend on the network (and not the
time the remote host spends servicing the request). RTT for ICMP echo requests is often studied,
as the remote host processing time is minimal.


Connection Life Span
Connection life span is the time from when a network connection is established to when it is
closed. Some protocols use a keep-alive strategy, extending the duration of connections so that
future operations can use existing connections and avoid the overheads and latency of connec-
tion establishment (and TLS establishment).

For more network latency measurements, see Section 10.5.4, Latency Analysis, which describes
using them to diagnose network performance.


10.3.6      Buffering
Despite various network latencies that may be encountered, network throughput can be sus-
tained at high rates by use of buffering on the sender and receiver. Larger buffers can mitigate
the effects of higher round-trip times by continuing to send data before blocking and waiting
for an acknowledgment.

TCP employs buffering, along with a sliding send window, to improve throughput. Network
sockets also have buffers, and applications may also employ their own, to aggregate data before
sending.

Buffering can also be performed by external network components, such as switches and routers,
in an effort to improve their own throughput. Unfortunately, the use of large buffers on these
components can lead to bufferbloat, where packets are queued for long intervals. This causes TCP
congestion avoidance on the hosts, which throttles performance. Features have been added to
the Linux 3.x kernels to address this problem (including byte queue limits, the CoDel queueing
discipline [Nichols 12], and TCP small queues). There is also a website for discussing the issue
[Bufferbloat 20].

The function of buffering (or large buffering) may be best served by the endpoints—the hosts—and
not the intermediate network nodes, following a principle called end-to-end arguments [Saltzer 84].


10.3.7 Connection Backlog
Another type of buffering is for the initial connection requests. TCP implements a backlog,
where SYN requests can queue in the kernel before being accepted by the user-land process.
When there are too many TCP connection requests for the process to accept in time, the backlog
reaches a limit and SYN packets are dropped, to be later retransmitted by the client. The retrans-
mission of these packets causes latency for the client connect time. The limit is tunable: it is a
parameter of the listen(2) syscall, and the kernel may also provide system-wide limits.

Backlog drops and SYN retransmits are indicators of host overload.
508   Chapter 10 Network


      10.3.8      Interface Negotiation
      Network interfaces may operate with different modes, autonegotiated between the connected
      transceivers. Some examples are:
         ■   Bandwidth: For example, 10, 100, 1,000, 10,000, 40,000, 100,000 Mbits/s
         ■   Duplex: Half or full duplex

      These examples are from Ethernet, which tends to use round base-10 numbers for bandwidth lim-
      its. Other physical-layer protocols, such as SONET, have a different set of possible bandwidths.

      Network interfaces are usually described in terms of their highest bandwidth and protocol, for
      example, 1 Gbit/s Ethernet (1 GbE). This interface may, however, autonegotiate to lower speeds if
      needed. This can occur if the other endpoint cannot operate faster, or to accommodate physical
      problems with the connection medium (bad wiring).

      Full-duplex mode allows bidirectional simultaneous transmission, with separate paths for
      transmit and receive that can each operate at full bandwidth. Half-duplex mode allows only
      one direction at a time.


      10.3.9 Congestion Avoidance
      Networks are shared resources that can become congested when traffic loads are high. This
      can cause performance problems: for example, routers or switches may drop packets, causing
      latency-inducing TCP retransmits. Hosts can also become overwhelmed when receiving high
      packet rates, and may drop packets themselves.

      There are many mechanisms to avoid these problems; these mechanisms should be studied, and
      tuned if necessary, to improve scalability under load. Examples for different protocols include:
         ■   Ethernet: An overwhelmed host may send pause frames to a transmitter, requesting that
             they pause transmission (IEEE 802.3x). There are also priority classes and priority pause
             frames for each class.
         ■   IP: Includes an Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) field.
         ■   TCP: Includes a congestion window, and various congestion control algorithms may be used.

      Later sections describe IP ECN and TCP congestion control algorithms in more detail.


      10.3.10       Utilization
      Network interface utilization can be calculated as the current throughput over the maximum
      bandwidth. Given variable bandwidth and duplex due to autonegotiation, calculating this isn’t
      as straightforward as it sounds.

      For full duplex, utilization applies to each direction and is measured as the current throughput
      for that direction over the current negotiated bandwidth. Usually it is just one direction that
      matters most, as hosts are commonly asymmetric: servers are transmit-heavy, and clients are
      receive-heavy.
                                                                              10.4    Architecture   509


Once a network interface direction reaches 100% utilization, it becomes a bottleneck, limiting
performance.

Some performance tools report activity only in terms of packets, not bytes. Since packet size can
vary greatly (as mentioned earlier), it is not possible to relate packet counts to byte counts for
calculating either throughput or (throughput-based) utilization.


10.3.11 Local Connections
Network connections can occur between two applications on the same system. These are
localhost connections and use a virtual network interface: loopback.

Distributed application environments are often split into logical parts that communicate over
the network. These can include web servers, database servers, caching servers, proxy servers, and
application servers. If they are running on the same host, their connections are to localhost.

Connecting via IP to localhost is the IP sockets technique of inter-process communication (IPC).
Another technique is Unix domain sockets (UDS), which create a file on the file system for com-
munication. Performance may be better with UDS, as the kernel TCP/IP stack can be bypassed,
skipping kernel code and the overheads of protocol packet encapsulation.

For TCP/IP sockets, the kernel may detect the localhost connection after the handshake, and
then shortcut the TCP/IP stack for data transfers, improving performance. This was developed as
a Linux kernel feature, called TCP friends, but was not merged [Corbet 12]. BPF can now be used
on Linux for this purpose, as is done by the Cilium software for container networking perfor-
mance and security [Cilium 20a].



10.4       Architecture
This section introduces network architecture: protocols, hardware, and software. These have
been summarized as background for performance analysis and tuning, with a focus on perfor-
mance characteristics. For more details, including general networking topics, see networking
texts [Stevens 93][Hassan 03], RFCs, and vendor manuals for networking hardware. Some of
these are listed at the end of the chapter.


10.4.1      Protocols
In this section, performance features and characteristics of IP, TCP, UDP, and QUIC are summa-
rized. How these protocols are implemented in hardware and software (including features such
as segmentation offload, connection queues, and buffering) is described in the later hardware
and software sections.


IP
The Internet Protocol (IP) versions 4 and 6 include a field to set the desired performance of a
connection: the Type of Service field in IPv4, and the Traffic Class field in IPv6. These fields
have since been redefined to contain a Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) (RFC 2474)
[Nichols 98] and an Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) field (RFC 3168) [Ramakrishnan 01].
510   Chapter 10 Network


      The DSCP is intended to support different service classes, each of which have different character-
      istics including packet drop probability. Example service classes include: telephony, broadcast
      video, low-latency data, high-throughput data, and low-priority data.

      ECN is a mechanism that allows servers, routers, or switches on the path to explicitly signal
      the presence of congestion by setting a bit in the IP header, instead of dropping a packet. The
      receiver will echo this signal back to the sender, which can then throttle transmission. This
      provides the benefits of congestion avoidance without incurring the penalty of packet drops
      (provided that the ECN bit is used correctly across the network).


      TCP
      The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is a commonly used Internet standard for creating
      reliable network connections. TCP is specified by RFC 793 [Postel 81] and later additions.

      In terms of performance, TCP can provide a high rate of throughput even on high-latency
      networks, by use of buffering and a sliding window. TCP also employs congestion control and a
      congestion window set by the sender, so that it can maintain a high but also reliable rate of trans-
      mission across different and varying networks. Congestion control avoids sending too many
      packets, which would cause congestion and a performance breakdown.

      The following is a summary of TCP performance features, including additions since the original
      specification:

          ■   Sliding window: This allows multiple packets up to the size of the window to be sent on
              the network before acknowledgments are received, providing high throughput even on
              high-latency networks. The size of the window is advertised by the receiver to indicate
              how many packets it is willing to receive at that time.
          ■   Congestion avoidance: To prevent sending too much data and causing saturation, which
              can cause packet drops and worse performance.
          ■   Slow-start: Part of TCP congestion control, this begins with a small congestion window
              and then increases it as acknowledgments (ACKs) are received within a certain time.
              When they are not, the congestion window is reduced.
          ■   Selective acknowledgments (SACKs): Allow TCP to acknowledge discontinuous packets,
              reducing the number of retransmits required.
          ■   Fast retransmit: Instead of waiting on a timer, TCP can retransmit dropped packets based
              on the arrival of duplicate ACKs. These are a function of round-trip time and not the typi-
              cally much slower timer.
          ■   Fast recovery: This recovers TCP performance after detecting duplicate ACKs, by resetting
              the connection to perform slow-start.
          ■   TCP fast open: Allows a client to include data in a SYN packet, so that server request
              processing can begin earlier and not wait for the SYN handshake (RFC7413). This can use a
              cryptographic cookie to authenticate the client.
                                                                                10.4   Architecture    511


    ■   TCP timestamps: Includes a timestamp for sent packets that is returned in the ACK, so
        that round-trip time can be measured (RFC 1323) [Jacobson 92].
    ■   TCP SYN cookies: Provides cryptographic cookies to clients during possible SYN flood
        attacks (full backlogs) so that legitimate clients can continue to connect, and without the
        server needing to store extra data for these connection attempts.

In some cases these features are implemented by use of extended TCP options added to the
protocol header.

Important topics for TCP performance include the three-way handshake, duplicate ACK detection,
congestion control algorithms, Nagle, delayed ACKs, SACK, and FACK.

Three-Way Handshake
Connections are established using a three-way handshake between the hosts. One host passively
listens for connections; the other actively initiates the connection. To clarify terminology:
passive and active are from RFC 793 [Postel 81]; however, they are commonly called listen and
connect, respectively, after the socket API. For the client/server model, the server performs listen
and the client performs connect.

The three-way handshake is pictured in Figure 10.6.




Figure 10.6 TCP three-way handshake

Connection latency from the client is indicated, which completes when the final ACK is sent.
After that, data transfer may begin.

This figure shows best-case latency for a handshake. A packet may be dropped, adding latency as
it is timed out and retransmitted.

Once the three-way handshake is complete, the TCP session is placed in the ESTABLISHED state.

States and Timers
TCP sessions switch between TCP states based on packets and socket events. The states are
LISTEN, SYN-SENT, SYN-RECEIVED, ESTABLISHED, FIN-WAIT-1, FIN-WAIT-2, CLOSE-WAIT,
CLOSING, LAST-ACK, TIME-WAIT, and CLOSED [Postal 80]. Performance analysis typically
focuses on those in the ESTABLISHED state, which are the active connections. Such connections
may be transferring data, or idle awaiting the next event: a data transfer or close event.
512   Chapter 10 Network


      A session that has fully closed enters the TIME_WAIT2 state so that late packets are not mis-
      associated with a new connection on the same ports. This can lead to a performance issue of
      port exhaustion, explained in Section 10.5.7, TCP Analysis.

      Some states have timers associated with them. TIME_WAIT is typically two minutes (some ker-
      nels, such as the Windows kernel, allow it to be tuned). There may also be a “keep alive” timer
      on ESTABLISHED, set to a long duration (e.g., two hours), to trigger probe packets to check that
      the remote host is still alive.

      Duplicate ACK Detection
      Duplicate ACK detection is used by the fast retransmit and fast recovery algorithms to quickly
      detect when a sent packet (or its ACK) has been lost. It works as follows:

            1. The sender sends a packet with sequence number 10.

            2. The receiver replies with an ACK for sequence number 11.

            3. The sender sends 11, 12, and 13.

            4. Packet 11 is dropped.

            5. The receiver replies to both 12 and 13 by sending an ACK for 11, which it is still expecting.

            6. The sender receives the duplicate ACKs for 11.

      Duplicate ACK detection is also used by various congestion avoidance algorithms.

      Retransmits
      Two commonly used mechanisms for TCP to detect and retransmits lost packets are:

             ■   Timer-based retransmits: These occur when a time has passed and a packet acknowl-
                 edgment has not yet been received. This time is the TCP retransmit timeout, calculated
                 dynamically based on the connection round-trip time (RTT). On Linux, this will be at
                 least 200 ms (TCP_RTO_MIN) for the first retransmit,3 and subsequent retransmits will be
                 much slower, following an exponential backoff algorithm that doubles the timeout.
             ■   Fast retransmits: When duplicate ACKs arrive, TCP can assume that a packet was dropped
                 and retransmit it immediately.

      To further improve performance, additional mechanisms have been developed to avoid the tim-
      er-based retransmit. One problem occurs is when the last transmitted packet is lost, and there
      are no subsequent packets to trigger duplicate ACK detection. (Consider the prior example with
      a loss on packet 13.) This is solved by Tail Loss Probe (TLP), which sends an additional packet
      (probe) after a short timeout on the last transmission to help detect packet loss [Dukkipati 13].

      Congestion control algorithms may also throttle throughput in the presence of retransmits.




      2
          While it is often written (and programmed) as TIME_WAIT, RFC 793 uses TIME-WAIT.
      3
          This seems to violate RFC6298, which stipulates a one second RTO minimum [Paxson 11].
                                                                             10.4     Architecture   513



Congestion Controls
Congestion control algorithms have been developed to maintain performance on congested
networks. Some operating systems (including Linux-based) allow the algorithm to be selected as
part of system tuning. These algorithms include:
   ■   Reno: Triple duplicate ACKs trigger: halving of the congestion window, halving of the
       slow-start threshold, fast retransmit, and fast recovery.
   ■   Tahoe: Triple duplicate ACKs trigger: fast retransmit, halving the slow-start threshold,
       congestion window set to one maximum segment size (MSS), and slow-start state. (Along
       with Reno, Tahoe was first developed for 4.3BSD.)
   ■   CUBIC: Uses a cubic function (hence the name) to scale the window, and a “hybrid start”
       function to exit slow start. CUBIC tends to be more aggressive than Reno, and is the
       default in Linux.
   ■   BBR: Instead of window-based, BBR builds an explicit model of the network path charac-
       teristics (RTT and bandwidth) using probing phases. BBR can provide dramatically better
       performance on some network paths, while hurting performance on others. BBRv2 is
       currently in development and promises to fix some of the deficiencies of v1.
   ■   DCTCP: DataCenter TCP relies on switches configured to emit Explicit Congestion
       Notification (ECN) marks at a very shallow queue occupancy to rapidly ramp up to the
       available bandwidth (RFC 8257) [Bensley 17]. This makes DCTCP unsuitable for deploy-
       ment across the Internet, but in a suitably configured controlled environment it can
       improve performance significantly.

Other algorithms not listed previously include Vegas, New Reno, and Hybla.

The congestion control algorithm can make a large difference to network performance. The
Netflix cloud services, for example, use BBR and found it can improve throughput threefold
during heavy packet loss [Ather 17]. Understanding how these algorithms react under different
network conditions is an important activity when analyzing TCP performance.

Linux 5.6, released in 2020, added support for developing new congestion control algorithms in
BPF [Corbet 20]. This allows them to be defined by the end user and loaded on demand.

Nagle
This algorithm (RFC 896) [Nagle 84] reduces the number of small packets on the network by
delaying their transmission to allow more data to arrive and be coalesced. This delays packets
only if there is data in the pipeline and delays are already being encountered.

The system may provide a tunable parameter or socket option to disable Nagle, which may be
necessary if its operation conflicts with delayed ACKs (see Section 10.8.2, Socket Options).

Delayed ACKs
This algorithm (RFC 1122) [Braden 89] delays the sending of ACKs up to 500 ms, so that multiple
ACKs may be combined. Other TCP control messages can also be combined, reducing the num-
ber of packets on the network.

As with Nagle, the system may provide a tunable parameter to disable this behavior.
514   Chapter 10 Network


      SACK, FACK, and RACK
      The TCP selective acknowledgment (SACK) algorithm allows the receiver to inform the sender
      that it received a noncontiguous block of data. Without this, a packet drop would eventually
      cause the entire send window to be retransmitted, to preserve a sequential acknowledgment
      scheme. This harms TCP performance and is avoided by most modern operating systems that
      support SACK.

      SACK has been extended by forward acknowledgments (FACK), which are supported in Linux by
      default. FACKs track additional state and better regulate the amount of outstanding data in the
      network, improving overall performance [Mathis 96].

      Both SACK and FACK are used to improve packet loss recovery. A newer algorithm, Recent
      ACKnowledgment (RACK; now called RACK-TLP with the incorporation of TLP) uses time infor-
      mation from ACKs for even better loss detection and recovery, rather than ACK sequences alone
      [Cheng 20]. For FreeBSD, Netflix has developed a new refactored TCP stack called RACK based
      on RACK, TLP, and other features [Stewart 18].

      Initial Window
      The initial window (IW) is the number of packets a TCP sender will transmit at the beginning
      of a connection before waiting for acknowledgment from the sender. For short flows, such as
      typical HTTP connections, an IW large enough to span the transmitted data can greatly reduce
      completion time, improving performance. Larger IWs, however, can risk congestion and packet
      drops. This is especially compounded when multiple flows start up at the same time.

      The Linux default (10 packets, aka IW10) can be too high on slow links or when many connec-
      tions start up; other operating systems default to 2 or 4 packets (IW2 or IW4).


      UDP
      The User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is a commonly used Internet standard for sending messages,
      called datagrams, across a network (RFC 768) [Postel 80]. In terms of performance, UDP provides:
         ■   Simplicity: Simple and small protocol headers reduce overheads of computation and size.
         ■   Statelessness: Lower overheads for connections and transmission.
         ■   No retransmits: These add significant latencies for TCP connections.

      While simple and often high-performing, UDP is not intended to be reliable, and data can be
      missing or received out of order. This makes it unsuitable for many types of connections. UDP
      also has no congestion avoidance and can therefore contribute to congestion on the network.

      Some services, including versions of NFS, can be configured to operate over TCP or UDP as
      desired. Others that perform broadcast or multicast data may be able to use only UDP.

      A major use for UDP has been DNS. Due to the simplicity of UDP, a lack of congestion control,
      and Internet support (it is not typically firewalled) there are now new protocols built upon UDP
      that implement their own congestion control and other features. An example is QUIC.
                                                                                10.4    Architecture    515



QUIC and HTTP/3
QUIC is a network protocol designed by Jim Roskind at Google as a higher-performing, lower-
latency alternative to TCP, optimized for HTTP and TLS [Roskind 12]. QUIC is built upon UDP,
and provides several features on top of it, including:
   ■   The ability to multiplex several application-defined streams on top of the same
       “connection.”
   ■   A TCP-like reliable in-order stream transport that can be optionally turned off for individual
       substreams.
   ■   Connection resumption when a client changes its network address, based on cryptographic
       authentication of connection IDs.
   ■   Full encryption of the payload data, including QUIC headers.
   ■   0-RTT connection handshakes including cryptography (for peers that have previously
       communicated).

QUIC is in heavy use by the Chrome web browser.

While QUIC was initially developed by Google, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) is in
the process of standardizing both the QUIC transport itself, and the specific configuration of
using HTTP over QUIC (the latter combination is named HTTP/3).


10.4.2       Hardware
Networking hardware includes interfaces, controllers, switches, routers, and firewalls. An
understanding of their operation is useful, even if they are managed by other staff (network
administrators).


Interfaces
Physical network interfaces send and receive messages, called frames, on the attached network.
They manage the electrical, optical, or wireless signaling involved, including the handling of
transmission errors.

Interface types are based on layer 2 standards, each providing a maximum bandwidth. Higher-
bandwidth interfaces provide lower data-transfer latency, at a higher cost. When designing new
servers, a key decision is often how to balance the price of the server with the desired network
performance.

For Ethernet, choices include copper or optical, with maximum speeds of 1 Gbit/s (1 GbE), 10 GbE,
40 GbE, 100 GbE, 200 GbE, and 400 GbE. Numerous vendors manufacture Ethernet interface
controllers, although your operating system may not have driver support for some of them.

Interface utilization can be examined as the current throughput divided by the current nego-
tiated bandwidth. Most interfaces have separate channels for transmit and receive, and when
operating in full-duplex mode, each channel’s utilization must be studied separately.
516   Chapter 10 Network


      Wireless interfaces can suffer performance issues due to poor signal strength and
      interference.4


      Controllers
      Physical network interfaces are provided to the system via controllers, either built into the
      system board or provided via expander cards.

      Controllers are driven by microprocessors and are attached to the system via an I/O transport
      (e.g., PCI). Either of these can become the limiter for network throughput or IOPS.

      For example, a dual 10 GbE network interface card is connected to a four-channel PCI express
      (PCIe) Gen 2 slot. The card has a maximum send or receive bandwidth of 2 × 10 GbE = 20 Gbits/s,
      and bidirectional, 40 Gbit/s. The slot has a maximum bandwidth of 4 × 4 Gbits/s = 16 Gbits/s.
      Therefore, network throughput on both ports will be limited by PCIe Gen 2 bandwidth, and
      it will not be possible to drive them both at line rate at the same time (I know this from
      practice!).


      Switches and Routers
      Switches provide a dedicated communication path between any two connected hosts, allowing
      multiple transmissions between pairs of hosts without interference. This technology replaced
      hubs (and before that, shared physical buses: the commonly used thick-Ethernet coaxial cable),
      which shared all packets with all hosts. This sharing led to contention when hosts transmitted
      simultaneously, identified by the interface as a collision using a “carrier sense multiple access
      with collision detection” (CSMA/CD) algorithm. This algorithm would exponentially back
      off and retransmit until successful, creating performance issues under load. With the use of
      switches this is behind us, but some observability tools still have collision counters—even
      though these usually occur only due to errors (negotiation or bad wiring).

      Routers deliver packets between networks and use network protocols and routing tables to
      determine efficient delivery paths. Delivering a packet between two cities may involve a dozen
      or more routers, plus other network hardware. The routers and routes are usually configured to
      update dynamically, so that the network can automatically respond to network and router out-
      ages, and to balance load. This means that at a given point in time, no one can be sure what path
      a packet is actually taking. With multiple paths possible, there is also the potential for packets to
      be delivered out of order, which can cause TCP performance problems.

      This element of mystery on the network is often blamed for poor performance: perhaps heavy
      network traffic—from other unrelated hosts—is saturating a router between the source and
      destination? Network administration teams are therefore frequently required to exonerate their
      infrastructure. They can do so using advanced real-time monitoring tools to check all routers
      and other network components involved.


      4
        I developed BPF software that turns Linux Wi-Fi signal strength into an audible pitch, and demonstrated it in an
      AWS re:Invent 2019 talk [Gregg 19b]. I would include it in this chapter, but I have not yet used it for enterprise or
      cloud environments, which so far are all wired.
                                                                              10.4    Architecture   517


Both routers and switches include buffers and microprocessors, which themselves can become
performance bottlenecks under load. As an extreme example, I once found that an early
10 GbE switch could drive no more than 11 Gbits/s in total across all ports, due to its limited
CPU capacity.

Note that switches and routers are also often where rate transitions occur (switching from one
bandwidth to another, e.g., a 10 Gbps link transitions to a 1 Gbps link). When this happens,
some buffering is necessary to avoid excessive drops, but many switches and routers over-buffer
(see the bufferbloat issue in Section 10.3.6, Buffering), leading to high latencies. Better queue
management algorithms can help eliminate this problem, but not all network device vendors
support them. Pacing at the source can also be a way to alleviate issues with rate transitions by
making the traffic less bursty.


Firewalls
Firewalls are often in use to permit only authorized communications based on a configured
rule set, improving the security of the network. They may be present as both physical network
devices and kernel software.

Firewalls can become a performance bottleneck, especially when configured to be stateful.
Stateful rules store metadata for each seen connection, and the firewall may experience excessive
memory load when processing many connections. This can happen due to a denial of service
(DoS) attack that attempts to inundate a target with connections. It can also happen with a
heavy rate of outbound connections, as they may require similar connection tracking.

As firewalls are custom hardware or software, the tools available to analyze them depends on
each firewall product. See their respective documentation.

The use of extended BPF to implement firewalls on commodity hardware is growing, due to its
performance, programmability, ease of use, and final cost. Companies adopting BPF firewalls
and DDoS solutions include Facebook [Deepak 18], Cloudflare [Majkowski 18], and Cilium
[Cilium 20a].

Firewalls can also be a nuisance during performance testing: performing a bandwidth experi-
ment when debugging an issue may involve modifying firewall rules to allow the connection
(and coordinating that with the security team).


Others
Your environment may include other physical network devices, such as hubs, bridges, repeaters,
and modems. Any of these can be a source of performance bottlenecks and dropped packets.


10.4.3      Software
Networking software includes the network stack, TCP, and device drivers. Topics related to
performance are discussed in this section.
518   Chapter 10 Network


      Network Stack
      The components and layers involved depend on the operating system type, version, protocols,
      and interfaces in use. Figure 10.7 depicts a general model, showing the software components.




      Figure 10.7 Generic network stack

      On modern kernels the stack is multithreaded, and inbound packets can be processed by
      multiple CPUs.

      Linux
      The Linux network stack is pictured in Figure 10.8, including the location of socket send/receive
      buffers and packet queues.

      On Linux systems, the network stack is a core kernel component, and device drivers are additional
      modules. Packets are passed through these kernel components as the struct sk_buff (socket
      buffer) data type. Note that there may also be queueing in the IP layer (not pictured) for packet
      reassembly.

      The following sections discuss Linux implementation details related to performance: TCP con-
      nection queues, TCP buffering, queueing disciplines, network device drivers, CPU scaling, and
      kernel bypass. The TCP protocol was described in the previous section.
                                                                              10.4   Architecture   519




Figure 10.8 Linux network stack

TCP Connection Queues
Bursts of inbound connections are handled by using backlog queues. There are two such queues,
one for incomplete connections while the TCP handshake completes (also known as the SYN
backlog), and one for established sessions waiting to be accepted by the application (also known
as the listen backlog). These are pictured in Figure 10.9.

Only one queue was used in earlier kernels, and it was vulnerable to SYN floods. A SYN flood is a
type of DoS attack that involves sending numerous SYNs to the listening TCP port from bogus IP
addresses. This fills the backlog queue while TCP waits to complete the handshake, preventing
real clients from connecting.

With two queues, the first can act as a staging area for potentially bogus connections, which are
promoted to the second queue only once the connection is established. The first queue can be
made long to absorb SYN floods and optimized to store only the minimum amount of metadata
necessary.
520   Chapter 10 Network




      Figure 10.9 TCP backlog queues

      The use of SYN cookies bypasses the first queue, as they show the client is already authorized.

      The length of these queues can be tuned independently (see Section 10.8, Tuning). The second
      can also be set by the application as the backlog argument to listen(2).


      TCP Buffering
      Data throughput is improved by using send and receive buffers associated with the socket. These
      are pictured in Figure 10.10.




      Figure 10.10 TCP send and receive buffers

      The size of both the send and receive buffers is tunable. Larger sizes improve throughput per-
      formance, at the cost of more main memory spent per connection. One buffer may be set to be
      larger than the other if the server is expected to perform more sending or receiving. The Linux
      kernel will also dynamically increase the size of these buffers based on connection activity, and
      allows tuning of their minimum, default, and maximum sizes.


      Segmentation Offload: GSO and TSO
      Network devices and networks accept packet sizes up to a maximum segment size (MSS) that
      may be as small as 1500 bytes. To avoid the network stack overheads of sending many small
      packets, Linux uses generic segmentation offload (GSO) to send packets up to 64 Kbytes in size
                                                                                             10.4     Architecture    521


(“super packets”), which are split into MSS-sized segments just before delivery to the network
device. If the NIC and driver support TCP segmentation offload (TSO), GSO leaves splitting to
the device, improving network stack throughput.5 There is also a generic receive offload (GRO)
complement to GSO [Linux 20i].6 GRO and GSO are implemented in kernel software, and TSO is
implemented by NIC hardware.


Queueing Discipline
This is an optional layer for managing traffic classification (tc), scheduling, manipulation, filter-
ing, and shaping of network packets. Linux provides numerous queueing discipline algorithms
(qdiscs), which can be configured using the tc(8) command. As each has a man page, the man(1)
command can be used to list them:

# man -k tc-
tc-actions (8)                - independently defined actions in tc
tc-basic (8)                  - basic traffic control filter
tc-bfifo (8)                  - Packet limited First In, First Out queue
tc-bpf (8)           - BPF programmable classifier and actions for ingress/egress
queueing disciplines
tc-cbq (8)                    - Class Based Queueing
tc-cbq-details (8)            - Class Based Queueing
tc-cbs (8)                    - Credit Based Shaper (CBS) Qdisc
tc-cgroup (8)                 - control group based traffic control filter
tc-choke (8)                  - choose and keep scheduler
tc-codel (8)                  - Controlled-Delay Active Queue Management algorithm
tc-connmark (8)               - netfilter connmark retriever action
tc-csum (8)                   - checksum update action
tc-drr (8)                    - deficit round robin scheduler
tc-ematch (8)                 - extended matches for use with "basic" or "flow" filters
tc-flow (8)                   - flow based traffic control filter
tc-flower (8)                 - flow based traffic control filter
tc-fq (8)                     - Fair Queue traffic policing
tc-fq_codel (8)               - Fair Queuing (FQ) with Controlled Delay (CoDel)
[...]

The Linux kernel sets pfifo_fast as the default qdisc, whereas systemd is less conservative and
sets it to fq_codel to reduce potential bufferbloat, at the cost of slightly higher complexity in the
qdisc layer.

BPF can enhance the capabilities of this layer with the programs of type BPF_PROG_TYPE_
SCHED_CLS and BPF_PROG_TYPE_SCHED_ACT. These BPF programs can be attached to kernel
ingress and egress points for packet filtering, mangling, and forwarding, as used by load balanc-
ers and firewalls.

5
  Some network cards provide a TCP offload engine (TOE) to offload part or all of TCP/IP protocol processing. Linux
does not support TOE for various reasons, including security, complexity, and even performance [Linux 16].
6
    UDP support for GSO and GRO was added to Linux in 2018, with QUIC a key use case [Bruijn 18].
