9.4

Architecture

SMR
Shingled Magnetic Recording (SMR) drives provide higher density by using narrower tracks.
These tracks are too narrow for the write head to record, but not for the (smaller) read head to
read, so it writes them by partially overlapping other tracks, in a style similar to roof shingles
(hence its name). Drives using SMR increase in density by around 25%, at the cost of degraded
write performance, as the overlapped data is destroyed and must also be re-written. These drives
are suitable for archival workloads that are written once then mostly read, but are not suited for
write-heavy workloads in RAID configurations [Mellor 20].

Disk Data Controller
Mechanical disks present a simple interface to the system, implying a fixed sectors-per-track
ratio and a contiguous range of addressable offsets. What actually happens on the disk is up to
the disk data controller—a disk internal microprocessor, programmed by firmware. Disks may
implement algorithms including sector zoning, affecting how the offsets are laid out. This is
something to be aware of, but it’s difficult to analyze—the operating system cannot see into the
disk data controller.

9.4.1.2 Solid-State Drives
These are also called solid-state disks (SSDs). The term solid-state refers to their use of solid-state
electronics, which provides programmable nonvolatile memory with typically much better performance than rotational disks. Without moving parts, these disks are also physically durable
and not susceptible to performance issues caused by vibration.
The performance of this disk type is usually consistent across different offsets (no rotational or
seek latency) and predictable for given I/O sizes. The random or sequential characteristic of workloads matters much less than with rotational disks. All of this makes them easier to study and do
capacity planning for. However, if they do encounter performance pathologies, understanding
them can be just as complex as with rotational disks, due to how they operate internally.
Some SSDs use nonvolatile DRAM (NV-DRAM). Most use flash memory.

Flash Memory
Flash-memory-based SSDs offer high read performance, particularly random read performance
that can beat rotational disks by orders of magnitude. Most are built using NAND flash memory,
which uses electron-based trapped-charge storage media that can store electrons persistently4 in
a no-power state [Cornwell 12]. The name “flash” relates to how data is written, which requires
erasing an entire block of memory at a time (including multiple pages, usually 8 or 64 KBytes per
page) and rewriting the contents. Because of these write overheads, flash memory has asymmetrical read/write performance: fast reads and slower writes. Drives typically mitigate this using
write-back caches to improve write performance, and a small capacitor as a battery backup in
case of a power failure.

4
But not indefinitely. Data retention errors for modern MLC may occur in a matter of mere months when powered off
[Cassidy 12][Cai 15].

439

440

Chapter 9 Disks

Flash memory comes in different types:
■

■

■

Single-level cell (SLC): Stores data bits in individual cells.
Multi-level cell (MLC): Stores multiple bits per cell (usually two, which requires four
voltage levels).
Enterprise multi-level cell (eMLC): MLC with advanced firmware intended for
enterprise use.

■

Tri-level cell (TLC): Stores three bits (eight voltage levels).

■

Quad-level cell (QLC): Stores four bits.

■

3D NAND / Vertical NAND (V-NAND): This stacks layers of flash memory (e.g., TLC) to
increase the density and storage capacity.

This list is in rough chronological order, with the newest technologies listed last: 3D NAND has
been commercially available since 2013.
SLC tends to have higher performance and reliability compared to other types and was preferred
for enterprise use, although with higher costs. MLC is now often used in the enterprise for its
higher density, in spite of its lower reliability. Flash reliability is often measured as the number
of block writes (program/erase cycles) a drive is expected to support. For SLC, this expectation is
around 50,000 to 100,000 cycles; for MLC around 5,000 to 10,000 cycles; for TLC around 3,000
cycles; and for QLC around 1,000 cycles [Liu 20].

Controller
The controller for an SSD has the following task [Leventhal 13]:
■

■

Input: Reads and writes occur per page (usually 8 Kbytes); writes can occur only to erased
pages; pages are erased in blocks of 32 to 64 (256–512 Kbytes).
Output: Emulates a hard drive block interface: reads or writes of arbitrary sectors (512 bytes
or 4 Kbytes).

Translating between input and output is performed by the controller’s flash translation layer
(FTL), which must also track free blocks. It essentially uses its own file system to do this, such as
a log-structured file system.
The write characteristics can be a problem for write workloads, especially when writing I/O
sizes that are smaller than the flash memory block size (which may be as large as 512 Kbytes).
This can cause write amplification, where the remainder of the block is copied elsewhere before
erasure, and also latency for at least the erase-write cycle. Some flash memory drives mitigate the
latency issue by providing an on-disk buffer (RAM-based) backed by a battery, so that writes can
be buffered and written later, even in the event of a power failure.
The most common enterprise-grade flash memory drive I’ve used performs optimally with 4 Kbyte
reads and 1 Mbyte writes, due to the flash memory layout. These values vary for different drives
and may be found via micro-benchmarking of I/O sizes.
Given the disparity between the native operations of flash and the exposed block interface,
there has been room for improvement by the operating system and its file systems. The TRIM

9.4

Architecture

command is an example: it informs the SSD that a region is no longer in use, allowing the SSD
to more easily assemble its pool of free blocks, reducing write amplification. (For SCSI, this
can be implemented using the UNMAP or WRITE SAME commands; for ATA, the DATA SET
MANAGEMENT command. Linux support includes the discard mount option, and the fstrim(8)
command.)

Lifespan
There are various problems with NAND flash as a storage medium, including burnout, data fade,
and read disturbance [Cornwell 12]. These can be solved by the SSD controller, which can move
data to avoid problems. It will typically employ wear leveling, which spreads writes across different blocks to reduce the write cycles on individual blocks, and memory overprovisioning, which
reserves extra memory that can be mapped into service when needed.
While these techniques improve lifespan, the SSD still has a limited number of write cycles per
block, depending on the type of flash memory and the mitigation features employed by the
drive. Enterprise-grade drives use memory overprovisioning and the most reliable type of flash
memory, SLC, to achieve write cycle rates of 1 million and higher. Consumer-grade drives based
on MLC may offer as few as 1,000 cycles.

Pathologies
Here are some flash memory SSD pathologies to be aware of:
■

■

■

Latency outliers due to aging, and the SSD trying harder to extract correct data (which is
checked using ECC).
Higher latency due to fragmentation (reformatting may fix this by cleaning up the FTL
block maps).
Lower throughput performance if the SSD implements internal compression.

Check for other developments with SSD performance features and issues encountered.

9.4.1.3 Persistent Memory
Persistent memory, in the form of battery-backed5 DRAM, is used for storage controller writeback caches. The performance of this type is orders of magnitude faster than flash, but its cost
and limited battery life span have limited it to only specialized uses.
A new type of persistent memory called 3D XPoint, developed by Intel and Micron, will allow
persistent memory to be used for many more applications at a compelling price/performance, in
between DRAM and flash memory. 3D XPoint works by storing bits in a stackable cross-gridded
data access array, and is byte-addressable. An Intel performance comparison reported 14 microsecond access latency for 3D XPoint compared to 200 microseconds for 3D NAND SSD [Hady 18].
3D XPoint also showed consistent latency for their test, whereas 3D NAND had a wider latency
distribution reaching up to 3 milliseconds.
3D XPoint has been commercially available since 2017. Intel uses the brand name Optane, and
releases it as Intel Optane persistent memory in a DIMM package, and as Intel Optane SSDs.
5

A battery or a super capacitor.

441

442

Chapter 9 Disks

9.4.2

Interfaces

The interface is the protocol supported by the drive for communication with the system, usually
via a disk controller. A brief summary of the SCSI, SAS, SATA, FC, and NVMe interfaces follows.
You will need to check what the current interfaces and supported bandwidths are, as they
change over time when new specifications are developed and adopted.

SCSI
The Small Computer System Interface was originally a parallel transport bus, using multiple
electrical connectors to transport bits in parallel. The first version, SCSI-1 in 1986, had a data
bus width of 8 bits, allowing one byte to be transferred per clock, and delivered a bandwidth
of 5 Mbytes/s. This was connected using a 50-pin Centronics C50. Later parallel SCSI versions
used wider data buses and more pins for the connectors, up to 80 pins, and bandwidths in the
hundreds of megabytes.
Because parallel SCSI is a shared bus, it can suffer performance issues due to bus contention, for
example when a scheduled system backup saturates the bus with low-priority I/O. Workarounds
included putting low-priority devices on their own SCSI bus or controller.
Clocking of parallel buses also becomes a problem at higher speeds which, along with the other
issues (including limited devices and the need for SCSI terminator packs), has led to a switch to
the serial version: SAS.

SAS
The Serial Attached SCSI interface is designed as a high-speed point-to-point transport, avoiding
the bus contention issues of parallel SCSI. The initial SAS-1 specification was 3 Gbits/s (released
in 2003), followed by SAS-2 supporting 6 Gbits/s (2009), SAS-3 supporting 12 Gbits/s (2012), and
SAS-4 supporting 22.5 Gbit/s (2017). Link aggregations are supported, so that multiple ports can
combine to deliver higher bandwidths. The actual data transfer rate is 80% of bandwidth, due to
8b/10b encoding.
Other SAS features include dual porting of drives for use with redundant connectors and architectures, I/O multipathing, SAS domains, hot swapping, and compatibility support for SATA
devices. These features have made SAS popular for enterprise use, especially with redundant
architectures.

SATA
For similar reasons as for SCSI and SAS, the parallel ATA (aka IDE) interface standard has evolved
to become the Serial ATA interface. Created in 2003, SATA 1.0 supported 1.5 Gbits/s; later major
versions are SATA 2.0 supporting 3.0 Gbits/s (2004), and SATA 3.0 supporting 6.0 Gbits/s (2008).
Additional features have been added in major and minor releases, including native command
queueing support. SATA uses 8b/10b encoding, so the data transfer rate is 80% of bandwidth.
SATA has been in common use for consumer desktops and laptops.

FC
Fibre Channel (FC) is a high-speed interface standard for data transfer, originally intended only
for fibre optic cable (hence its name) and later supporting copper as well. FC is commonly used

9.4

Architecture

in enterprise environments to create storage area networks (SANs) where multiple storage devices
can be connected to multiple servers via a Fibre Channel Fabric. This offers greater scalability
and accessibility than other interfaces, and is similar to connecting multiple hosts via a network. And, like networking, FC can involve using switches to connect together multiple local
endpoints (server and storage). Development of a Fibre Channel standard began in 1988 with
the first version approved by ANSI in 1994 [FICA 20]. There have since been many variants and
speed improvements, with the recent Gen 7 256GFC standard reaching up to 51,200 MB/s full
duplex [FICA 18].

NVMe
Non-Volatile Memory express (NVMe) is a PCIe bus specification for storage devices. Rather than
connecting storage devices to a storage controller card, an NVMe device is itself a card that connects directly to the PCIe bus. Created in 2011, the first NVMe specification was 1.0e (released
in 2013), and the latest is 1.4 (2019) [NVMe 20]. Newer specifications add various features, for
example, thermal management features and commands for self-testing, verifying data, and sanitizing data (making recovery impossible). The bandwidth of NVMe cards is bounded by the PCIe
bus; PCIe version 4.0, commonly used today, has a single-direction bandwidth of 31.5 Gbytes/s
for a x16 card (link width).
An advantage with NVMe over traditional SAS and SATA is its support for multiple hardware
queues. These queues can be used from the same CPU to promote cache warmth (and with
Linux multi-queue support, shared kernel locks are also avoided). These queues also allow much
greater buffering, supporting up to 64 thousand commands in each queue, whereas typical SAS
and SATA are limited to 256 and 32 commands respectively.
NVMe also supports SR-IOV for improving virtual machine storage performance (see Chapter 11,
Cloud Computing, Section 11.2, Hardware Virtualization).
NVMe is used for low-latency flash devices, with an expected I/O latency of less than
20 microseconds.

9.4.3

Storage Types

Storage can be provided to a server in a number of ways; the following sections describe four
general architectures: disk devices, RAID, storage arrays, and network-attached storage (NAS).

Disk Devices
The simplest architecture is a server with internal disks, individually controlled by the operating system. The disks connect to a disk controller, which is circuitry on the main board or an
expander card, and which allows the disk devices to be seen and accessed. In this architecture
the disk controller merely acts as a conduit so that the system can communicate with the disks.
A typical personal computer or laptop has a disk attached in this way for primary storage.
This architecture is the easiest to analyze using performance tools, as each disk is known to the
operating system and can be observed separately.
Some disk controllers support this architecture, where it is called just a bunch of disks (JBOD).

443

444

Chapter 9 Disks

RAID
Advanced disk controllers can provide the redundant array of independent disks (RAID) architecture for disk devices (originally the redundant array of inexpensive disks [Patterson 88]). RAID
can present multiple disks as a single big, fast, and reliable virtual disk. These controllers often
include an on-board cache (RAM) to improve read and write performance.
Providing RAID by a disk controller card is called hardware RAID. RAID can also be implemented
by operating system software, but hardware RAID has been preferred as CPU-expensive checksum and parity calculations can be performed more quickly on dedicated hardware, plus such
hardware can include a battery backup unit (BBU) for improved resiliency. However, advances in
processors have produced CPUs with a surplus of cycles and cores, reducing the need to offload
parity calculations. A number of storage solutions have moved back to software RAID (for example, using ZFS), which reduces complexity and hardware cost and improves observability from the
operating system. In the case of a major failure, software RAID may also be easier to repair than
hardware RAID (imagine a dead RAID card).
The following sections describe the performance characteristics of RAID. The term stripe is often
used: this refers to when data is grouped as blocks that are written across multiple drives (like
drawing a stripe through them all).

Types
Various RAID types are available to meet varying needs for capacity, performance, and reliability. This summary focuses on the performance characteristics shown in Table 9.3.

Table 9.3

RAID types

Level

Description

Performance

0 (concat.)

Drives are filled one at a time.

Eventually improves random read performance
when multiple drives can take part.

0 (stripe)

Drives are used in parallel,
splitting (striping) I/O across
multiple drives.

Expected best random and sequential I/O
performance (depends on stripe size and
workload pattern).

1 (mirror)

Multiple drives (usually two) are
grouped, storing identical content
for redundancy.

Good random and sequential read
performance (can read from all drives
simultaneously, depending on implementation).
Writes limited by slowest disk in mirror, and
throughput overheads doubled (two drives).

10

A combination of RAID-0 stripes
across groups of RAID-1 drives,
providing capacity and redundancy.

Similar performance characteristics to RAID-1
but allows more groups of drives to take part,
like RAID-0, increasing bandwidth.

5

Data is stored as stripes across
multiple disks, along with extra
parity information for redundancy.

Poor write performance due to read-modifywrite cycle and parity calculations.

6

RAID-5 with two parity disks per
stripe.

Similar to RAID-5 but worse.

9.4

Architecture

While RAID-0 striping performs the best, it has no redundancy, making it impractical for most
production use. Possible exceptions include fault-tolerant cloud computing environments that
does not store critical data and where a failed instance will automatically be replaced, and storage servers used for caching only.

Observability
As described in the earlier section on virtual disk utilization, the use of hardware-supplied virtual disk devices can make observability more difficult in the operating system, which does not
know what the physical disks are doing. If RAID is supplied via software, individual disk devices
can usually be observed, as the operating system manages them directly.

Read-Modify-Write
When data is stored as a stripe including a parity, as with RAID-5, write I/O can incur additional
read I/O and compute time. This is because writes that are smaller than the stripe size may
require the entire stripe to be read, the bytes modified, the parity recalculated, and then the
stripe rewritten. An optimization for RAID-5 may be in use to avoid this: instead of reading
the entire stripe, only the portions of the stripe (strips) are read that include the modified data,
along with the parity. By a sequence of XOR operations, an updated parity can be calculated
and written along with the modified strips.
Writes that span the entire stripe can write over the previous contents, without needing to read
them first. Performance in this environment may be improved by balancing the size of the stripe
with the average I/O size of the writes, to reduce the additional read overhead.

Caches
Disk controllers that implement RAID-5 can mitigate read-write-modify performance by use of
a write-back cache. These caches must be battery-backed, so that in the event of a power failure
they can still complete buffered writes.

Additional Features
Be aware that advanced disk controller cards can provide advanced features that can affect
performance. It is a good idea to browse the vendor documentation so that you’re at least aware
of what may be in play. For example, here are a couple of features from Dell PERC 5 cards
[Dell 20]:
■

■

Patrol read: Every several days, all disk blocks are read and their checksums verified. If
the disks are busy servicing requests, the resources given to the patrol read function are
reduced, to avoid competing with the system workload.
Cache flush interval: The time in seconds between flushing dirty data in the cache to
disk. Longer times may reduce disk I/O due to write cancellation and better aggregate
writes; however, they may also cause higher read latency during the larger flushes.

Both of these can have a significant effect on performance.

445

446

Chapter 9 Disks

Storage Arrays
Storage arrays allow many disks to be connected to the system. They use advanced disk controllers
so that RAID can be configured, and they usually provide a large cache (gigabytes) to improve
read and write performance. These caches are also typically battery-backed, allowing them to
operate in write-back mode. A common policy is to switch to write-through mode if the battery fails, which may be noticed as a sudden drop in write performance due to waiting for the
read-modify-write cycle.
An additional performance consideration is how the storage array is attached to the system—
usually via an external storage controller card. The card, and the transport between it and the
storage array, will both have limits for IOPS and throughput. For improvements in both performance and reliability, storage arrays are often dual-attachable, meaning they can be connected
using two physical cables, to one or two different storage controller cards.

Network-Attached Storage
NAS is provided to the system over the existing network via a network protocol, such as NFS,
SMB/CIFS, or iSCSI, usually from dedicated systems known as NAS appliances. These are separate systems and should be analyzed as such. Some performance analysis may be done on the
client, to inspect the workload applied and I/O latencies. The performance of the network also
becomes a factor, and issues can arise from network congestion and from multiple-hop latency.

9.4.4

Operating System Disk I/O Stack

The components and layers in a disk I/O stack will depend on the operating system, version,
and software and hardware technologies used. Figure 9.7 depicts a general model. See Chapter 3,
Operating Systems, for a similar model including the application.

Figure 9.7 Generic disk I/O stack

9.4

Architecture

Block Device Interface
The block device interface was created in early Unix for accessing storage devices in units of
blocks of 512 bytes, and to provide a buffer cache to improve performance. The interface exists
in Linux, although the role of the buffer cache has diminished as other file system caches have
been introduced, as described in Chapter 8, File Systems.
Unix provided a path to bypass the buffer cache, called raw block device I/O (or just raw I/O),
which could be used via character special device files (see Chapter 3, Operating Systems). These
files are no longer commonly available by default in Linux. Raw block device I/O is different
from, but in some ways similar to, the “direct I/O” file system feature described in Chapter 8,
File Systems.
The block I/O interface can usually be observed from operating system performance tools
(iostat(1)). It is also a common location for static instrumentation and more recently can be
explored with dynamic instrumentation as well. Linux has enhanced this area of the kernel
with additional features.

Linux
The main components of the Linux block I/O stack are shown in Figure 9.8.

Figure 9.8 Linux I/O stack

447

448

Chapter 9 Disks

Linux has enhanced block I/O with the addition of I/O merging and I/O schedulers for improving
performance, volume managers for grouping multiple devices, and a device mapper for creating
virtual devices.

I/O merging
When I/O requests are created, Linux can merge and coalesce them as shown in Figure 9.9.

Figure 9.9 I/O merging types
This groups I/O, reducing the per-I/O CPU overheads in the kernel storage stack and overheads
on the disk, improving throughput. Statistics for these front and back merges are available in
iostat(1).
After merging, I/O is then scheduled for delivery to the disks.

I/O Schedulers
I/O is queued and scheduled in the block layer either by classic schedulers (only present in Linux
versions older than 5.0) or by the newer multi-queue schedulers. These schedulers allow I/O to
be reordered (or rescheduled) for optimized delivery. This can improve and more fairly balance
performance, especially for devices with high I/O latencies (rotational disks).
Classic schedulers include:
■

■

Noop: This doesn’t perform scheduling (noop is CPU-talk for no-operation) and can
be used when the overhead of scheduling is deemed unnecessary (for example, in a
RAM disk).
Deadline: Attempts to enforce a latency deadline; for example, read and write expiry
times in units of milliseconds may be selected. This can be useful for real-time systems,
where determinism is desired. It can also solve problems of starvation: where an I/O
request is starved of disk resources as newly issued I/O jump the queue, resulting in a
latency outlier. Starvation can occur due to writes starving reads, and as a consequence of
elevator seeking and heavy I/O to one area of disk starving I/O to another. The deadline
scheduler solves this, in part, by using three separate queues for I/O: read FIFO, write FIFO,
and sorted [Love 10].

9.5

■

Methodology

CFQ: The completely fair queueing scheduler allocates I/O time slices to processes, similar
to CPU scheduling, for fair usage of disk resources. It also allows priorities and classes to be
set for user processes, via the ionice(1) command.

A problem with the classic schedulers was their use of a single request queue, protected by a
single lock, which became a performance bottleneck at high I/O rates. The multi-queue driver
(blk-mq, added in Linux 3.13) solves this by using separate submission queues for each CPU, and
multiple dispatch queues for the devices. This delivers better performance and lower latency for
I/O versus classic schedulers, as requests can be processed in parallel and on the same CPU where
the I/O was initiated. This was necessary to support flash memory-based and other device types
capable of handling millions of IOPS [Corbet 13b].
Multi-queue schedulers include:
■

■

■

■

None: No queueing.
BFQ: The budget fair queueing scheduler, similar to CFQ, but allocates bandwidth as
well as I/O time. It creates a queue for each process performing disk I/O, and maintains a
budget for each queue measured in sectors. There is also a system-wide budget timeout to
prevent one process from holding a device for too long. BFQ supports cgroups.
mq-deadline: A blk-mq version of deadline (described earlier).
Kyber: A scheduler that adjusts read and write dispatch queue lengths based on performance so that target read or write latencies can be met. It is a simple scheduler that only
has two tunables: the target read latency (read_lat_nsec) and target synchronous write
latency (write_lat_nsec). Kyber has shown improved storage I/O latencies in the Netflix
cloud, where it is used by default.

Since Linux 5.0, the multi-queue schedulers are the default (the classic schedulers are no longer
included).
I/O schedulers are documented in detail in the Linux source under Documentation/block.
After I/O scheduling, the request is placed on the block device queue for issuing to the device.

9.5 Methodology
This section describes various methodologies and exercises for disk I/O analysis and tuning. The
topics are summarized in Table 9.4.

Table 9.4

Disk performance methodologies

Section

Methodology

Types

9.5.1

Tools method

Observational analysis

9.5.2

USE method

Observational analysis

9.5.3

Performance monitoring

Observational analysis, capacity planning

9.5.4

Workload characterization

Observational analysis, capacity planning

9.5.5

Latency analysis

Observational analysis

449

450

Chapter 9 Disks

Section

Methodology

Types

9.5.6

Static performance tuning

Observational analysis, capacity planning

9.5.7

Cache tuning

Observational analysis, tuning

9.5.8

Resource controls

Tuning

9.5.9

Micro-benchmarking

Experimentation analysis

9.5.10

Scaling

Capacity planning, tuning

See Chapter 2, Methodologies, for more methodologies and the introduction to many of these.
These methods may be followed individually or used in combination. When investigating disk
issues, my suggestion is to use the following strategies, in this order: the USE method, performance monitoring, workload characterization, latency analysis, micro-benchmarking, static
analysis, and event tracing.
Section 9.6, Observability Tools, shows operating system tools for applying these methods.

9.5.1 Tools Method
The tools method is a process of iterating over available tools, examining key metrics they provide. While a simple methodology, it can overlook issues for which the tools provide poor or no
visibility, and it can be time-consuming to perform.
For disks, the tools method can involve checking the following (for Linux):
■

■

■

■

■

■

iostat: Using extended mode to look for busy disks (over 60% utilization), high average
service times (over, say, 10 ms), and high IOPS (depends)
iotop/biotop: To identify which process is causing disk I/O
biolatency: To examine the distribution of I/O latency as a histogram, looking for multimodal distributions and latency outliers (over, say, 100 ms)
biosnoop: To examine individual I/O
perf(1)/BCC/bpftrace: For custom analysis including viewing user and kernel stacks that
issued I/O
Disk-controller-specific tools (from the vendor)

If an issue is found, examine all fields from the available tools to learn more context. See
Section 9.6, Observability Tools, for more about each tool. Other methodologies can also be
used, which can identify more types of issues.

9.5.2

USE Method

The USE method is for identifying bottlenecks and errors across all components, early in a performance investigation. The sections that follow describe how the USE method can be applied
to disk devices and controllers, while Section 9.6, Observability Tools, shows tools for measuring
specific metrics.

9.5

Methodology

Disk Devices
For each disk device, check for:
■

Utilization: The time the device was busy

■

Saturation: The degree to which I/O is waiting in a queue

■

Errors: Device errors

Errors may be checked first. They sometimes get overlooked because the system functions
correctly—albeit more slowly—in spite of disk failures: disks are commonly configured in a
redundant pool of disks designed to tolerate some failure. Apart from standard disk error counters from the operating system, disk devices may support a wider variety of error counters that
can be retrieved by special tools (for example, SMART data6).
If the disk devices are physical disks, utilization should be straightforward to find. If they are
virtual disks, utilization may not reflect what the underlying physical disks are doing. See
Section 9.3.9, Utilization, for more discussion on this.

Disk Controllers
For each disk controller, check for:
■

Utilization: Current versus maximum throughput, and the same for operation rate

■

Saturation: The degree to which I/O is waiting due to controller saturation

■

Errors: Controller errors

Here the utilization metric is not defined in terms of time, but rather in terms of the limitations
of the disk controller card: throughput (bytes per second) and operation rate (operations per
second). Operations are inclusive of read/write and other disk commands. Either throughput or
operation rate may also be limited by the transport connecting the disk controller to the system,
just as it may also be limited by the transport from the controller to the individual disks. Each
transport should be checked the same way: errors, utilization, saturation.
You may find that the observability tools (e.g., Linux iostat(1)) do not present per-controller metrics but provide them only per disk. There are workarounds for this: if the system has only one
controller, you can determine the controller IOPS and throughput by summing those metrics for
all disks. If the system has multiple controllers, you will need to determine which disks belong
to which, and sum the metrics accordingly.
Performance of disk controllers and transports is often overlooked. Fortunately, they are not
common sources of system bottlenecks, as their capacity typically exceeds that of the attached
disks. If total disk throughput or IOPS always levels off at a certain rate, even under different
workloads, this may be a clue that the disk controllers or transports are in fact causing the
problems.

6

On Linux, see tools such as MegaCLI and smartctl (covered later), cciss-vol-status, cpqarrayd, varmon, and
dpt-i2o-raidutils.

451

452

Chapter 9 Disks

9.5.3 Performance Monitoring
Performance monitoring can identify active issues and patterns of behavior over time. Key
metrics for disk I/O are:
■

Disk utilization

■

Response time

Disk utilization at 100% for multiple seconds is very likely an issue. Depending on your environment, over 60% may also cause poor performance due to increased queueing. The value for
“normal” or “bad” depends on your workload, environment, and latency requirements. If you
aren’t sure, micro-benchmarks of known-to-be-good versus bad workloads may be performed to
show how these can be found via disk metrics. See Section 9.8, Experimentation.
These metrics should be examined on a per-disk basis, to look for unbalanced workloads and
individual poorly performing disks. The response time metric may be monitored as a per-second
average and can include other values such as the maximum and standard deviation. Ideally, it
would be possible to inspect the full distribution of response times, such as by using a histogram
or heat map, to look for latency outliers and other patterns.
If the system imposes disk I/O resource controls, statistics to show if and when these were in use
can also be collected. Disk I/O may be a bottleneck as a consequence of the imposed limit, not
the activity of the disk itself.
Utilization and response time show the result of disk performance. More metrics may be added
to characterize the workload, including IOPS and throughput, providing important data for use
in capacity planning (see the next section and Section 9.5.10, Scaling).

9.5.4 Workload Characterization
Characterizing the load applied is an important exercise in capacity planning, benchmarking,
and simulating workloads. It can also lead to some of the largest performance gains, by identifying unnecessary work that can be eliminated.
The following are basic attributes for characterizing disk I/O workload:
■

I/O rate

■

I/O throughput

■

I/O size

■

Read/write ratio

■

Random versus sequential

Random versus sequential, the read/write ratio, and I/O size are described in Section 9.3, Concepts.
I/O rate (IOPS) and I/O throughput are defined in Section 9.1, Terminology.
These characteristics can vary from second to second, especially for applications and file systems
that buffer and flush writes at intervals. To better characterize the workload, capture maximum
values as well as averages. Better still, examine the full distribution of values over time.

9.5

Methodology

Here is an example workload description, to show how these attributes can be expressed together:
The system disks have a light random read workload, averaging 350 IOPS with a
throughput of 3 Mbytes/s, running at 96% reads. There are occasional short bursts of
sequential writes, lasting between 2 and 5 seconds, which drive the disks to a maximum of 4,800 IOPS and 560 Mbytes/s. The reads are around 8 Kbytes in size, and the
writes around 128 Kbytes.
Apart from describing these characteristics system-wide, they can also be used to describe perdisk and per-controller I/O workloads.

Advanced Workload Characterization/Checklist
Additional details may be included to characterize the workload. These have been listed here
as questions for consideration, which may also serve as a checklist when studying disk issues
thoroughly:
■

What is the IOPS rate system-wide? Per disk? Per controller?

■

What is the throughput system-wide? Per disk? Per controller?

■

Which applications or users are using the disks?

■

What file systems or files are being accessed?

■

Have any errors been encountered? Were they due to invalid requests, or issues on the disk?

■

How balanced is the I/O over available disks?

■

What is the IOPS for each transport bus involved?

■

What is the throughput for each transport bus involved?

■

What non-data-transfer disk commands are being issued?

■

Why is disk I/O issued (kernel call path)?

■

To what degree is disk I/O application-synchronous?

■

What is the distribution of I/O arrival times?

IOPS and throughput questions can be posed for reads and writes separately. Any of these may
also be checked over time, to look for maximums, minimums, and time-based variations. Also see
Chapter 2, Methodologies, Section 2.5.11, Workload Characterization, which provides a higherlevel summary of the characteristics to measure (who, why, what, how).

Performance Characterization
The previous workload characterization lists examine the workload applied. The following
examines the resulting performance:
■

How busy is each disk (utilization)?

■

How saturated is each disk with I/O (wait queueing)?

■

What is the average I/O service time?

453

454

Chapter 9 Disks

■

What is the average I/O wait time?

■

Are there I/O outliers with high latency?

■

What is the full distribution of I/O latency?

■

Are system resource controls, such as I/O throttling, present and active?

■

What is the latency of non data-transfer disk commands?

Event Tracing
Tracing tools can be used to record all file system operations and details to a log for later analysis
(e.g., Section 9.6.7, biosnoop). This can include the disk device ID, I/O or command type, offset,
size, issue and completion timestamps, completion status, and originating process ID and name
(when possible). With the issue and completion timestamps, the I/O latency can be calculated
(or it can be directly included in the log). By studying the sequence of request and completion
timestamps, I/O reordering by the device can also be identified. While this may be the ultimate
tool for workload characterization, in practice it may cost noticeable overhead to capture and save,
depending on the rate of disk operations. If the disk writes for the event trace are included in the
trace, it may not only pollute the trace, but also create a feedback loop and a performance problem.

9.5.5 Latency Analysis
Latency analysis involves drilling deeper into the system to find the source of latency. With disks,
this will often end at the disk interface: the time between an I/O request and the completion interrupt. If this matches the I/O latency at the application level, it’s usually safe to assume that the I/O
latency originates from the disks, allowing you to focus your investigation on them. If the latency
differs, measuring it at different levels of the operating system stack will identify the origin.
Figure 9.10 pictures a generic I/O stack, with the latency shown at different levels of two I/O
outliers, A and B.
The latency of I/O A is similar at each level from the application down to the disk drivers. This
correlation points to the disks (or the disk driver) as the cause of the latency. This could be inferred
if the layers were measured independently, based on the similar latency values between them.
The latency of B appears to originate at the file system level (locking or queueing?), with the I/O
latency at lower levels contributing much less time. Be aware that different layers of the stack
may inflate or deflate I/O, which means the size, count, and latency will differ from one layer to
the next. The B example may be a case of only observing one I/O at the lower levels (of 10 ms),
but failing to account for other related I/O that occurred to service the same file system I/O (e.g.,
metadata).
The latency at each level may be presented as:
■

Per-interval I/O averages: As typically reported by operating system tools.

■

Full I/O distributions: As histograms or heat maps; see Section 9.7.3, Latency Heat Maps.

■

Per-I/O latency values: See the earlier Event Tracing section.

The last two are useful for tracking the origin of outliers and can help identify cases where I/O
has been split or coalesced.

9.5

Methodology

Figure 9.10 Stack latency analysis

9.5.6 Static Performance Tuning
Static performance tuning focuses on issues of the configured environment. For disk performance, examine the following aspects of the static configuration:
■

How many disks are present? Of which types (e.g., SMR, MLC)? Sizes?

■

What version is the disk firmware?

■

How many disk controllers are present? Of which interface types?

■

Are disk controller cards connected to high-speed slots?

■

How many disks are connected to each HBA?

■

If disk/controller battery backups are present, what is their power level?

■

What version is the disk controller firmware?

■

Is RAID configured? How exactly, including stripe width?

■

Is multipathing available and configured?

■

What version is the disk device driver?

■

What is the server main memory size? In use by the page and buffer caches?

■

Are there operating system bugs/patches for any of the storage device drivers?

■

Are there resource controls in use for disk I/O?

Be aware that performance bugs may exist in device drivers and firmware, which are ideally
fixed by updates from the vendor.

455

456

Chapter 9 Disks

Answering these questions can reveal configuration choices that have been overlooked.
Sometimes a system has been configured for one workload, and then repurposed for another.
This strategy will revisit those choices.
While working as the performance lead for Sun’s ZFS storage product, the most common
performance complaint I received was caused by a misconfiguration: using half a JBOD (12 disks)
of RAID-Z2 (wide stripes). This configuration delivered good reliability but unimpressive performance, similar to that of a single disk. I learned to ask for configuration details first (usually over
the phone) before spending time logging in to the system and examining I/O latency.

9.5.7 Cache Tuning
There may be many different caches present in the system, including application-level, file system, disk controller, and on the disk itself. A list of these was included in Section 9.3.3, Caching,
which can be tuned as described in Chapter 2, Methodologies, Section 2.5.18, Cache Tuning. In
summary, check which caches exist, check that they are working, check how well they are working, and then tune the workload for the cache and tune the cache for the workload.

9.5.8

Resource Controls

The operating system may provide controls for allocating disk I/O resources to processes or
groups of processes. These may include fixed limits for IOPS and throughput, or shares for a
more flexible approach. How these work are implementation-specific, as discussed in Section 9.9,
Tuning.

9.5.9 Micro-Benchmarking
Micro-benchmarking disk I/O was introduced in Chapter 8, File Systems, which explains the difference between testing file system I/O and testing disk I/O. Here we would like to test disk I/O,
which usually means testing via the operating system’s device paths, particularly the raw device
path if available, to avoid all file system behavior (including caching, buffering, I/O splitting,
I/O coalescing, code path overheads, and offset mapping differences).
Factors for micro-benchmarking include:
■

Direction: Reads or writes

■

Disk offset pattern: Random or sequential

■

Range of offsets: Full disk or tight ranges (e.g., offset 0 only)

■

I/O size: 512 bytes (typical minimum) up to 1 Mbyte

■

Concurrency: Number of I/O in flight, or number of threads performing I/O

■

Number of devices: Single disk tests, or multiple disks (to explore controller and bus
limits)

The next two sections show how these factors can be combined to test disk and disk controller
performance. See Section 9.8, Experimentation, for details of the specific tools that can be used
to perform these tests.

9.5

Methodology

Disks
Micro-benchmarking can be performed on a per-disk basis to determine the following, along
with suggested workloads:
■

Maximum disk throughput (Mbytes per second): 128 Kbyte or 1 Mbyte reads, sequential

■

Maximum disk operation rate (IOPS): 512-byte reads,7 offset 0 only

■

Maximum disk random reads (IOPS): 512-byte reads, random offsets

■

■

Read latency profile (average microseconds): Sequential reads, repeat for 512 bytes, 1K,
2K, 4K, and so on
Random I/O latency profile (average microseconds): 512-byte reads, repeat for full offset
span, beginning offsets only, end offsets only

These tests can be repeated for writes. The use of “offset 0 only” is intended to cache the data in
the on-disk cache, so that cache access time can be measured.8

Disk Controllers
Disk controllers may be micro-benchmarked by applying a workload to multiple disks, designed
to hit limits in the controller. These tests may be performed using the following, along with
suggested workloads for the disks:
■

Maximum controller throughput (Mbytes per second): 128 Kbytes, offset 0 only

■

Maximum controller operation rate (IOPS): 512-byte reads, offset 0 only

Apply the workload to the disks one by one, watching for limits. It may take over a dozen disks to
find the limit in a disk controller.

9.5.10

Scaling

Disks and disk controllers have throughput and IOPS limits, which can be demonstrated via
micro-benchmarking as described previously. Tuning can improve performance only up to these
limits. If more disk performance is needed, and other strategies such as caching won’t work, the
disks will need to scale.
Here is a simple method, based on capacity planning of resources:
1. Determine the target disk workload, in terms of throughput and IOPS. If this is a new system, see Chapter 2, Methodologies, Section 2.7, Capacity Planning. If the system already
has a workload, express the user population in terms of current disk throughput and IOPS,
and scale these numbers to the target user population. (If cache is not scaled at the same
time, the disk workload may increase, because the cache-per-user ratio becomes smaller.)
2. Calculate the number of disks required to support this workload. Factor in RAID configuration. Do not use the maximum throughput and IOPS values per disk, as this would

7
8

This size is intended to match the smallest disk block size. Many disks today use 4 Kbytes.

I’ve heard a rumor that some drive manufacturers have firmware routines to accelerate sector 0 I/O, inflating performance for such a test. You can verify by testing sector 0 versus sector your_favorite_number.

457

458

Chapter 9 Disks

result in driving disks at 100% utilization, leading to immediate performance issues due to
saturation and queueing. Pick a target utilization (say, 50%) and scale values accordingly.
3. Calculate the number of disk controllers required to support this workload.
4. Check that transport limits have not been exceeded, and scale transports if necessary.
5. Calculate CPU cycles per disk I/O, and the number of CPUs required (this may necessitate
multiple CPUs and parallel I/O).
The maximum per-disk throughput and IOPS numbers used will depend on their type and
the disk type. See Section 9.3.7, IOPS Are Not Equal. Micro-benchmarking can be used to find
specific limits for a given I/O size and I/O type, and workload characterization can be used on
existing workloads to see which sizes and types matter.
To deliver the disk workload requirement, it’s not uncommon to find servers requiring dozens of
disks, connected via storage arrays. We used to say, “Add more spindles.” We may now say, “Add
more flash.”

9.6

Observability Tools

This section introduces disk I/O observability tools for Linux-based operating systems. See the
previous section for strategies to follow when using them.
The tools in this section are listed in Table 9.5.

Table 9.5

Disk observability tools

Section

Tool

Description

9.6.1

iostat

Various per-disk statistics

9.6.2

sar

Historical disk statistics

9.6.3

PSI

Disk pressure stall information

9.6.4

pidstat

Disk I/O usage by process

9.6.5

perf

Record block I/O tracepoints

9.6.6

biolatency

Summarize disk I/O latency as a histogram

9.6.7

biosnoop

Trace disk I/O with PID and latency

9.6.8

iotop, biotop

Top for disks: summarize disk I/O by process

9.6.9

biostacks

Show disk I/O with initialization stacks

9.6.10

blktrace

Disk I/O event tracing

9.6.11

bpftrace

Custom disk tracing

9.6.12

MegaCli

LSI controller statistics

9.6.13

smartctl

Disk controller statistics

9.6 Observability Tools

This is a selection of tools to support Section 9.5, Methodology, beginning with traditional tools
and statistics, then tracing tools, and finally disk controller statistics. Some of the traditional
tools are likely available on other Unix-like operating systems where they originated, including:
iostat(8) and sar(1). Many of the tracing tools are BPF-based, and use BCC and bpftrace frontends
(Chapter 15); they are: biolatency(8), biosnoop(8), biotop(8), and biostacks(8).
See the documentation for each tool, including its man pages, for full references of its features.

9.6.1

iostat

iostat(1) summarizes per-disk I/O statistics, providing metrics for workload characterization, utilization, and saturation. It can be executed by any user and is typically the first command used
to investigate disk I/O issues at the command line. The statistics it provides are also typically
shown by monitoring software, so it can be worthwhile to learn iostat(1) in detail to deepen your
understanding of monitoring statistics. These statistics are enabled by default by the kernel,9 so
the overhead of this tool is considered negligible.
The name “iostat” is short for “I/O statistics,” although it might have been better to call it
“diskiostat” to reflect the type of I/O it reports. This has led to occasional confusion when a user
knows that an application is performing I/O (to the file system) but wonders why it can’t be seen
via iostat(1) (the disks).
iostat(1) was written in the early 1980s for Unix, and different versions are available on the
different operating systems. It can be added to Linux-based systems via the sysstat package.
The following describes the Linux version.

iostat Default Output
Without any arguments or options, a summary-since-boot for CPU and disk statistics is printed.
It’s covered here as an introduction to this tool; however, you are not expected to use this mode,
as the extended mode covered later is more useful.
$ iostat
Linux 5.3.0-1010-aws (ip-10-1-239-218)

02/12/20

_x86_64_

avg-cpu:

%steal

%idle

0.21

99.28

(2 CPU)

%user

%nice %system %iowait

0.29

0.01

0.18

Device

tps

kB_read/s

kB_wrtn/s

kB_read

kB_wrtn

loop0

0.00

0.05

0.00

1232

0

3.40

17.11

36.03

409902

863344

0.03

[...]
nvme0n1

The first output line is a summary of the system, including the kernel version, host name, date,
architecture, and CPU count. Subsequent lines show summary-since-boot statistics for the CPUs
(avg-cpu; these statistics were covered in Chapter 6, CPUs) and disk devices (under Device:).
9

Statistics can be disabled via the /sys/block/<dev>/queue/iostats file. I don’t know of anyone ever doing so.

459

460

Chapter 9 Disks

Each disk device is shown as a row, with basic details in the columns. I’ve highlighted the column headers in bold; they are:
■

tps: Transactions per second (IOPS)

■

kB_read/s, kB_wrtn/s: Kilobytes read per second, and written per second

■

kB_read, kB_wrtn: Total kilobytes read and written

Some SCSI devices, including CD-ROMs, may not be shown by iostat(1). SCSI tape drives can be
examined using tapestat(1) instead, also in the sysstat package. Also note that, while iostat(1)
reports block device reads and writes, it may exclude some other types of disk device commands
depending on the kernel (see the logic in the kernel function blk_do_io_stat()). The iostat(1)
extended mode includes extra fields for these device commands.

iostat Options
iostat(1) can be executed with various options, followed by an optional interval and count. For
example:
# iostat 1 10

will print one-second summaries ten times. And:
# iostat 1

will print one-second summaries without end (until Ctrl-C is typed).
Commonly used options are:
■

-c: Display CPU report

■

-d: Display disk report

■

-k: Use kilobytes instead of (512-byte) blocks

■

-m: Use megabytes instead of (512-byte) blocks

■

-p: Include per-partition statistics

■

-t: Timestamp output

■

-x: Extended statistics

■

-s: Short (narrow) output

■

-z: Skip displaying zero-activity summaries

There is also an environment variable, POSIXLY_CORRECT=1, to output blocks (512 bytes each)
instead of Kbytes. Some older versions included an option for NFS statistics, -n. Since sysstat
version 9.1.3, this was moved to the separate nfsiostat command.

iostat Extended Short Output
Extended output (-x) provides extra columns that are useful for the methodologies covered earlier. These extra columns include IOPS and throughput metrics for workload characterization,

9.6 Observability Tools

utilization and queue lengths for the USE method, and disk response times for performance
characterization and latency analysis.
Over the years, the extended output has gained more and more fields, and the latest release
(12.3.1, Dec. 2019) produces output that is 197 characters wide. This not only does not fit in this
book, it does not fit in many wide terminals either, making the output difficult to read due to
line wraps. A solution was added in 2017, the -s option, to provide a “short” or narrow output
that is intended to fit within an 80-character width.
Here is an example of short (-s) extended (-x) statistics, and skipping zero-activity devices (-z):
$ iostat -sxz 1
[...]
avg-cpu:

%user

%nice %system %iowait

15.82

0.00

10.71

%steal

%idle

1.53

40.31

31.63

Device

tps

kB/s

rqm/s

await aqu-sz

nvme0n1

1642.00

9064.00

664.00

0.44

0.00

areq-sz

%util

5.52 100.00

[...]

The disk columns are:
■

tps: Transactions issued per second (IOPS)

■

kB/s: Kbytes per second

■

rqm/s: Requests queued and merged per second

■

■

await: Average I/O response time, including time queued in the OS and the I/O response
time of the device (ms)
aqu-sz: Average number of requests both waiting in the driver request queue and active on
the device

■

areq-sz: Average request size in Kbytes

■

%util: Percent of time the device was busy processing I/O requests (utilization)

The most important metric for delivered performance is await, showing the average total wait
time for I/O. What constitutes “good” or “bad” depends on your needs. In the example output,
await was 0.44 ms, which is satisfactory for this database server. It can increase for a number of
reasons: queueing (load), larger I/O sizes, random I/O on rotational devices, and device errors.
For resource usage and capacity planning, %util is important, but bear in mind that it is only a
measure of busyness (non-idle time) and may mean little for virtual devices backed by multiple disks. Those devices may be better understood by the load applied: tps (IOPS) and kB/s
(throughput).
Nonzero counts in the rqm/s column show that contiguous requests were merged before delivery
to the device, to improve performance. This metric is also a sign of a sequential workload.
Since areq-sz is after merging, small sizes (8 Kbytes or less) are an indicator of a random I/O
workload that could not be merged. Large sizes may be either large I/O or a merged sequential
workload (indicated by earlier columns).

461

462

Chapter 9 Disks

iostat Extended Output
Without the -s option, -x prints many more columns. Here is the summary since boot (no interval or count) for sysstat version 12.3.2 (from Apr 2020):
$ iostat -x
[...]
Device
r/s
rkB/s
wrqm/s %wrqm w_await wareq-sz
f/s f_await aqu-sz %util
nvme0n1
0.92 22.91
0.00
0.00

0.23
0.89
0.00

rrqm/s
d/s

9.91
0.16
10.66
0.00
0.12

%rrqm r_await rareq-sz
w/s
wkB/s
dkB/s
drqm/s %drqm d_await dareq-sz
40.70
0.00

0.56
0.00

43.01
0.00

3.10
0.00

33.09
0.00

These break down many of the -sx metrics into read and write components, and also includes
discards and flushes.
The extra columns are:
■

■

■

■

■

r/s, w/s, d/s, f/s: Read, write, discard, and flush requests completed from the disk device
per second (after merges)
rkB/s, wkB/s, dkB/s: Read, write, and discard Kbytes from the disk device per second
%rrqm/s, %wrqm/s, %drqm/s: Read, write, and discard requests queued and merged as a percentage of the total requests for that type
r_await, w_await, d_await, f_await: Read, write, discard, and flush average response time,
including time queued in the OS and the response time from the device (ms)
rareq-sz, wareq-sz, dareq-sz: Read, write, and discard average size (Kbytes)

Examining reads and writes separately is important. Applications and file systems commonly
use techniques to mitigate write latency (e.g., write-back caching), so the application is less likely
to be blocked on disk writes. This means that any metrics that group reads and writes are skewed
by a component that may not directly matter (the writes). By splitting them, you can start examining r_wait, which shows average read latency, and is likely to be the most important metric for
application performance.
The reads and writes as IOPS (r/s, w/s) and throughput (rkB/s, wkB/s) are important for workload
characterization.
The discard and flush statistics are new additions to iostat(1). Discard operations free up blocks
on the drive (the ATA TRIM command), and their statistics were added in the Linux 4.19 kernel.
Flush statistics were added in Linux 5.5. These can help to narrow down the reason for disk
latency.
Here is another useful iostat(1) combination:
$ iostat -dmstxz -p ALL 1
Linux 5.3.0-1010-aws (ip-10-1-239-218)

02/12/20

_x86_64_

(2 CPU)

9.6 Observability Tools

02/12/20 17:39:29
Device

tps

MB/s

rqm/s

await

areq-sz

aqu-sz

%util

nvme0n1

3.33

0.04

1.09

0.87

12.84

0.00

0.12

nvme0n1p1

3.31

0.04

1.09

0.87

12.91

0.00

0.12

02/12/20 17:39:30
Device

tps

MB/s

rqm/s

await

areq-sz

aqu-sz

%util

nvme0n1

1730.00

14.97

709.00

0.54

8.86

0.02

99.60

nvme0n1p1

1538.00

14.97

709.00

0.61

9.97

0.02

99.60

[...]

The first output is the summary since boot, followed by one-second intervals. The -d focuses on
disk statistics only (no CPU), -m for Mbytes, and -t for the timestamp, which can be useful when
comparing the output to other timestamped sources, and-p ALL includes per-partition statistics.
Unfortunately, the current version of iostat(1) does not include disk errors; otherwise all USE
method metrics could be checked from one tool!

9.6.2 sar
The system activity reporter, sar(1), can be used to observe current activity and can be configured to archive and report historical statistics. It is introduced in Section 4.4, sar, and mentioned
in various other chapters in this book for the different statistics it provides.
The sar(1) disk summary is printed using the -d option, demonstrated in the following examples
with an interval of one second. The output is wide, so it is included here in two parts (sysstat
12.3.2):
$ sar -d 1
Linux 5.3.0-1010-aws (ip-10-0-239-218)

02/13/20

_x86_64_

(2 CPU)

09:10:22

DEV

tps

rkB/s

wkB/s

dkB/s

areq-sz \ ...

09:10:23

dev259-0

1509.00

11100.00

12776.00

0.00

15.82 / ...

[...]

Here are the remaining columns:
$ sar -d 1
09:10:22

\ ... \

aqu-sz

await

%util

09:10:23

/ ... /

0.02

0.60

94.00

[...]

These columns also appear in iostat(1) -x output, and were described in the previous section.
This output shows a mixed read/write workload with an await of 0.6 ms, driving the disk to 94%
utilization.

463

464

Chapter 9 Disks

Previous versions of sar(1) included a svctm (service time) column: the average (inferred) disk
response time, in milliseconds. See Section 9.3.1, Measuring Time, for background on service
time. Since its simplistic calculation was no longer accurate for modern disks that perform I/O in
parallel, svctm has been removed in later versions.

9.6.3

PSI

Linux pressure stall information (PSI), added in Linux 4.20, includes statistics for I/O saturation.
These not only show if there is I/O pressure, but how it is changing over the last five minutes.
Example output:
# cat /proc/pressure/io
some avg10=63.11 avg60=32.18 avg300=8.62 total=667212021
full avg10=60.76 avg60=31.13 avg300=8.35 total=622722632

This output shows that I/O pressure is increasing, with a higher 10-second average (63.11) than
the 300-second average (8.62). These averages are percentages of time that a task was I/O stalled.
The some line shows when some tasks (threads) were affected, and the full line shows when all
runnable tasks were affected.
As with load averages, this can be a high-level metric used for alerting. Once you become aware
that there is a disk performance issue, you can use other tools to find the root causes, including
pidstat(8) for disk statistics by process.

9.6.4

pidstat

The Linux pidstat(1) tool prints CPU usage by default and includes a -d option for disk I/O statistics. This is available on kernels 2.6.20 and later. For example:
$ pidstat -d 1
Linux 5.3.0-1010-aws (ip-10-0-239-218)

02/13/20

_x86_64_

(2 CPU)

kB_wr/s kB_ccwr/s iodelay

Command

09:47:41

UID

PID

kB_rd/s

09:47:42

0

2705

32468.00

0.00

0.00

5

tar

09:47:42

0

2706

0.00

8192.00

0.00

0

gzip

09:47:56

UID

PID

kB_rd/s

09:47:57

0

229

0.00

72.00

0.00

0

systemd-journal

09:47:57

0

380

0.00

4.00

0.00

0

auditd

09:47:57
0
u4:1-flush-259:0

2699

4.00

0.00

0.00

10

kworker/

09:47:57

0

2705

15104.00

0.00

0.00

0

tar

09:47:57

0

2706

0.00

6912.00

0.00

0

gzip

[...]
kB_wr/s kB_ccwr/s iodelay

Command

9.6 Observability Tools

Columns include:
■

kB_rd/s: Kilobytes read per second

■

kB_wd/s: Kilobytes issued for write per second

■

■

kB_ccwr/s: Kilobytes canceled for write per second (e.g., overwritten or deleted
before flush)
iodelay: The time the process was blocked on disk I/O (clock ticks), including swapping

The workload seen in the output was a tar command reading the file system to a pipe, and
gzip reading the pipe and writing a compressed archive file. The tar reads caused iodelay
(5 clock ticks), whereas the gzip writes did not, due to write-back caching in the page cache.
Some time later the page cache was flushed, as can be seen in the second interval output by the
kworker/u4:1-flush-259:0 process, which experienced iodelay.
iodelay is a recent addition and shows the magnitude of performance issues: how much the
application waited. The other columns show the workload applied.
Note that only superusers (root) can access disk statistics for processes that they do not own.
These are read via /proc/PID/io.

9.6.5

perf

The Linux perf(1) tool (Chapter 13) can record block tracepoints. Listing them:
# perf list 'block:*'
List of pre-defined events (to be used in -e):
block:block_bio_backmerge

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_bio_bounce

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_bio_complete

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_bio_frontmerge

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_bio_queue

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_bio_remap

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_dirty_buffer

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_getrq

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_plug

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_rq_complete

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_rq_insert

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_rq_issue

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_rq_remap

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_rq_requeue

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_sleeprq

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_split

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_touch_buffer

[Tracepoint event]

block:block_unplug

[Tracepoint event]

465

466

Chapter 9 Disks

For example, the following records block device issues with stack traces. A sleep 10 command is
provided as the duration of tracing.
# perf record -e block:block_rq_issue -a -g sleep 10
[ perf record: Woken up 22 times to write data ]
[ perf record: Captured and wrote 5.701 MB perf.data (19267 samples) ]
# perf script --header
[...]
mysqld 1965 [001] 160501.158573: block:block_rq_issue: 259,0 WS 12288 () 10329704 +
24 [mysqld]
ffffffffb12d5040 blk_mq_start_request+0xa0 ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb12d5040 blk_mq_start_request+0xa0 ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb1532b4c nvme_queue_rq+0x16c ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb12d7b46 __blk_mq_try_issue_directly+0x116 ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb12d87bb blk_mq_request_issue_directly+0x4b ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb12d8896 blk_mq_try_issue_list_directly+0x46 ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb12dce7e blk_mq_sched_insert_requests+0xae ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb12d86c8 blk_mq_flush_plug_list+0x1e8 ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb12cd623 blk_flush_plug_list+0xe3 ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb12cd676 blk_finish_plug+0x26 ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb119771c ext4_writepages+0x77c ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb10209c3 do_writepages+0x43 ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb1017ed5 __filemap_fdatawrite_range+0xd5 ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb10186ca file_write_and_wait_range+0x5a ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb118637f ext4_sync_file+0x8f ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb1105869 vfs_fsync_range+0x49 ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb11058fd do_fsync+0x3d ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb1105944 __x64_sys_fsync+0x14 ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb0e044ca do_syscall_64+0x5a ([kernel.kallsyms])
ffffffffb1a0008c entry_SYSCALL_64_after_hwframe+0x44 ([kernel.kallsyms])
7f2285d1988b fsync+0x3b (/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libpthread-2.30.so)
55ac10a05ebe Fil_shard::redo_space_flush+0x44e (/usr/sbin/mysqld)
55ac10a06179 Fil_shard::flush_file_redo+0x99 (/usr/sbin/mysqld)
55ac1076ff1c [unknown] (/usr/sbin/mysqld)
55ac10777030 log_flusher+0x520 (/usr/sbin/mysqld)
55ac10748d61
std::thread::_State_impl<std::thread::_Invoker<std::tuple<Runnable, void (*)(log_t*),
log_t*> > >::_M_run+0xc1 (/usr/sbin/mysql
7f228559df74 [unknown] (/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libstdc++.so.6.0.28)
7f226c3652c0 [unknown] ([unknown])
55ac107499f0
std::thread::_State_impl<std::thread::_Invoker<std::tuple<Runnable, void (*)(log_t*),
log_t*> > >::~_State_impl+0x0 (/usr/sbin/
5441554156415741 [unknown] ([unknown])
[...]

9.6 Observability Tools

The output is a one-line summary for each event, followed by the stack trace that led to it. The
one-line summary begins with default fields from perf(1): the process name, thread ID, CPU
ID, timestamp, and event name (see Chapter 13, perf, Section 13.11, perf script). The remaining
fields are specific to the tracepoint: for this block:block_rq_issue tracepoint, they are, along with
the field contents:
■

Disk major and minor numbers: 259,0

■

I/O type: WS (synchronous writes)

■

I/O size: 12288 (bytes)

■

I/O command string: ()

■

Sector address: 10329704

■

Number of sectors: 24

■

Process: mysqld

These fields are from the format string of the tracepoint (see Chapter 4, Observability Tools,
Section 4.3.5, Tracepoints, under Tracepoints Arguments and Format String).
The stack trace can help explain the nature of the disk I/O. In this case, it is from the mysqld
log_flusher() routine that called fsync(2). The kernel code path shows it was handled by the ext4
file system, and became a disk I/O issue via blk_mq_try_issue_list_directly().
Often I/O will be queued and then issued later by a kernel thread, and tracing the block:block_
rq_issue tracepoint will not show the originating process or user-level stack trace. In those cases
you can try tracing block:block_rq_insert instead, which is for queue insertion. Note that it
misses I/O that did not queue.

One-Liners
The following one-liners demonstrate using filters with the block tracepoints.
Trace all block completions, of size at least 100 Kbytes, until Ctrl-C10:
perf record -e block:block_rq_complete --filter 'nr_sector > 200'

Trace all block completions, synchronous writes only, until Ctrl-C:
perf record -e block:block_rq_complete --filter 'rwbs == "WS"

Trace all block completions, all types of writes, until Ctrl-C:
perf record -e block:block_rq_complete --filter 'rwbs ~ "*W*"'

Disk I/O Latency
Disk I/O latency (described earlier as disk request time) can also be determined by recording both
the disk issue and completion events for later analysis. The following records them for 60 seconds then writes the events to a out.disk01.txt file:

10

With a sector size of 512 bytes, 100 Kbytes means 200 sectors.

467

468

Chapter 9 Disks

perf record -e block:block_rq_issue,block:block_rq_complete -a sleep 60
perf script --header > out.disk01.txt

You can post-process the output file using whatever is convenient: awk(1), Perl, Python, R,
Google Spreadsheets, etc. Associate issues with completions and use the recorded timestamps to
calculate the latency.
The following tools, biolatency(8) and biosnoop(8), calculate disk I/O latency efficiently in kernel
space using a BPF program, and include the latency directly in the output.

9.6.6 biolatency
biolatency(8)11 is a BCC and bpftrace tool to show disk I/O latency as a histogram. The term I/O
latency used here refers to the time from issuing a request to the device, to when it completes
(aka disk request time).
The following shows biolatency(8) from BCC tracing block I/O for 10 seconds:
# biolatency 10 1
Tracing block device I/O... Hit Ctrl-C to end.
usecs

: count

distribution

0 -> 1

: 0

|

|

2 -> 3

: 0

|

|

4 -> 7

: 0

|

|

8 -> 15

: 0

|

|

16 -> 31

: 2

|

|

32 -> 63

: 0

|

|

64 -> 127

: 0

|

|

128 -> 255

: 1065

|*****************

|

256 -> 511

: 2462

|****************************************|

512 -> 1023

: 1949

|*******************************

|

1024 -> 2047

: 373

|******

|

2048 -> 4095

: 1815

|*****************************

|

4096 -> 8191

: 591

|*********

|

8192 -> 16383

: 397

|******

|

16384 -> 32767

: 50

|

|

This output shows a bi-modal distribution, with one mode between 128 and 1023 microseconds,
and another between 2048 and 4095 microseconds (2.0 to 4.1 milliseconds.) Now that I know
that the device latency is bi-modal, understanding why may lead to tuning that moves more I/O
to the faster mode. For example, the slower I/O could be random I/O or larger-sized I/O (which

11

Origin: I created biolatency for BCC on 20-Sep-2015 and bpftrace on 13-Sep-2018, based on an earlier iolatency
tool I developed. I added the “b” to these tools to make it clear it refers to block I/O.

9.6 Observability Tools

can be determined using other BPF tools), or different I/O flags (shown using the -F option). The
slowest I/O in this output reached the 16- to 32-millisecond range: this sounds like queueing on
the device.
The BCC version of biolatency(8) supports options including:
■

-m: Output in milliseconds

■

-Q: Include OS queued I/O time (OS request time)

■

-F: Show a histogram for each I/O flag set

■

-D: Show a histogram for each disk device

Using -Q makes biolatency(8) report the full I/O time from creation and insertion on a kernel
queue to device completion, described earlier as the block I/O request time.
The BCC biolatency(8) also accepts optional interval and count arguments, in seconds.

Per-Flag
The -F option is especially useful, breaking down the distribution for each I/O flag. For example,
with -m for millisecond histograms:
# biolatency -Fm 10 1
Tracing block device I/O... Hit Ctrl-C to end.
flags = Sync-Write
msecs
0 -> 1

: count

distribution

: 2

|****************************************|

flags = Flush
msecs
0 -> 1

: count

distribution

: 1

|****************************************|

flags = Write
msecs

: count

distribution

0 -> 1

: 14

|****************************************|

2 -> 3

: 1

|**

|

4 -> 7

: 10

|****************************

|

8 -> 15

: 11

|*******************************

|

16 -> 31

: 11

|*******************************

|

flags = NoMerge-Write
msecs

: count

distribution

0 -> 1

: 95

|**********

|

2 -> 3

: 152

|*****************

|

4 -> 7

: 266

|******************************

|

8 -> 15

: 350

|****************************************|

16 -> 31

: 298

|**********************************

|

469

470

Chapter 9 Disks

flags = Read
msecs
0 -> 1

: count

distribution

: 11

|****************************************|

flags = ReadAhead-Read
msecs

: count

distribution

0 -> 1

: 5261

|****************************************|

2 -> 3

: 1238

|*********

|

4 -> 7

: 481

|***

|

8 -> 15

: 5

|

|

16 -> 31

: 2

|

|

These flags may be handled differently by the storage device; separating them allows us to
study them in isolation. The previous output shows that writes were slower than reads, and can
explain the earlier bi-modal distribution.
biolatency(8) summarizes disk I/O latency. To examine it for each I/O, use biosnoop(8).

9.6.7

biosnoop

biosnoop(8)12 is a BCC and bpftrace tool that prints a one-line summary for each disk I/O. For
example:
# biosnoop
TIME(s)

COMM

T

SECTOR

BYTES

LAT(ms)

0.009165000

jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174

PID

nvme0n1 W

2116272

8192

0.43

0.009612000

jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174

nvme0n1 W

2116288

4096

0.39

0.011836000

mysqld

1948

nvme0n1 W

10434672

4096

0.45

0.012363000

jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174

nvme0n1 W

2116296

8192

0.49

0.012844000

jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174

nvme0n1 W

2116312

4096

0.43

0.016809000

mysqld

1948

nvme0n1 W

10227712

262144

1.82

0.017184000

mysqld

1948

nvme0n1 W

10228224

262144

2.19

0.017679000

mysqld

1948

nvme0n1 W

10228736

262144

2.68

0.018056000

mysqld

1948

nvme0n1 W

10229248

262144

3.05

0.018264000

mysqld

1948

nvme0n1 W

10229760

262144

3.25

0.018657000

mysqld

1948

nvme0n1 W

10230272

262144

3.64

0.018954000

mysqld

1948

nvme0n1 W

10230784

262144

3.93

0.019053000

mysqld

1948

nvme0n1 W

10231296

131072

4.03

0.019731000

jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174

nvme0n1 W

2116320

8192

0.49

0.020243000

jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174

nvme0n1 W

2116336

4096

0.46

0.020593000

mysqld

nvme0n1 R

4495352

4096

0.26

1948

DISK

[...]

12
Origin: I created the BCC version on 16-Sep-2015, and the bpftrace version on 15-Nov-2017, based on an earlier
tool of mine from 2003. The full origin is described in [Gregg 19].

9.6 Observability Tools

This output shows a write workload to disk nvme0n1, mostly from mysqld, PID 174, with varying
I/O sizes. The columns are:
■

TIME(s): I/O completion time in seconds

■

COMM: Process name (if known by this tool)

■

PID: Process ID (if known by this tool)

■

DISK: Storage device name

■

T: Type: R == reads, W == writes

■

SECTOR: Address on disk in units of 512-byte sectors

■

BYTES: Size of the I/O request

■

LAT(ms): Duration of the I/O from device issue to device completion (disk request time)

Around the middle of the example output is a series of 262,144 byte writes, beginning with a
latency of 1.82 ms and increasing in latency for each subsequent I/O, ending with 4.03 ms. This
is a pattern I commonly see, and the likely reason can be calculated from another column in
the output: TIME(s). If you subtract the LAT(ms) column from the TIME(s) column, you have the
starting time of the I/O, and these started around the same time. This appears to be a group of
writes that were sent at the same time, queued on the device, and then completed in turn, with
increasing latency for each.
By careful examination of the start and end times, reordering on the device can also be identified.
Since the output can many thousands of lines, I have often used the R statistical software to plot
the output as a scatter plot, to help in identifying these patterns (see Section 9.7, Visualizations).

Outlier Analysis
Here is a method for finding and analyzing latency outliers using biosnoop(8).
1. Write the output to a file:
# biosnoop > out.biosnoop01.txt

2. Sort the output by the latency column, and print the last five entries (those with the highest latency):
# sort -n -k 8,8 out.biosnoop01.txt | tail -5
31.344175

logger

10994

nvme0n1 W 15218056

262144

30.92

31.344401

logger

10994

nvme0n1 W 15217544

262144

31.15

31.344757

logger

10994

nvme0n1 W 15219080

262144

31.49

31.345260

logger

10994

nvme0n1 W 15218568

262144

32.00

46.059274

logger

10994

nvme0n1 W 15198896

4096

64.86

3. Open the output in a text editor (e.g., vi(1) or vim(1)):
# vi out.biosnoop01.txt

471

472

Chapter 9 Disks

4. Work through the outliers from slowest to fastest, searching for the time in the first column.
The slowest was 64.86 milliseconds, with the completion time of 46.059274 (seconds).
Searching for 46.059274:
[...]
45.992419

jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174

nvme0n1 W 2107232

8192

45.992988

jbd2/nvme0n1p1 174

nvme0n1 W 2107248

4096

0.50

46.059274

logger

nvme0n1 W 15198896

4096

64.86

10994

0.45

[...]

5. Look at events that occurred prior to the outlier, to see whether they had similar latency
and therefore this was the result of queueing (similar to the 1.82 to 4.03 ms ramp seen in
the first biosnoop(8) example output), or for any other clues. That’s not the case here: the
previous event was around 6 ms earlier, with a latency of 0.5 ms. The device may have
reordered events and completed the others first. If the previous completion event was
around 64 ms ago, then the gap in completions from the device may be explained by other
factors: e.g., this system is a VM instance, and can be de-scheduled by the hyper visor
during I/O, adding that time to the I/O time.

Queued Time
A -Q option to BCC biosnoop(8) can be used to show the time spent between the creation of the
I/O and the issue to the device (previously called the block I/O wait time or OS wait time). This time
is mostly spent on OS queues, but could also include memory allocation and lock acquisition.
For example:
# biosnoop -Q
TIME(s)

COMM

PID

DISK

T SECTOR

BYTES

0.000000

kworker/u4:0

9491

nvme0n1 W 5726504

4096

QUE(ms) LAT(ms)
0.06

0.60

0.000039

kworker/u4:0

9491

nvme0n1 W 8128536

4096

0.05

0.64

0.000084

kworker/u4:0

9491

nvme0n1 W 8128584

4096

0.05

0.68

0.000138

kworker/u4:0

9491

nvme0n1 W 8128632

4096

0.05

0.74

0.000231

kworker/u4:0

9491

nvme0n1 W 8128664

4096

0.05

0.83

[...]

The queued time is shown in the QUE(ms) column.

9.6.8

iotop, biotop

I wrote the first iotop in 2005 for Solaris-based systems [McDougall 06a]. There are now many
versions, including a Linux iotop(1) tool based on kernel accounting statistics13 [Chazarain 13],
and my own biotop(8) based on BPF.

13

iotop(1) requires CONFIG_TASK_DELAY_ACCT, CONFIG_TASK_IO_ACCOUNTING, CONFIG_TASKSTATS, and
CONFIG_VM_EVENT_COUNTERS.

9.6 Observability Tools

iotop
iotop can typically be installed via an iotop package. When run without arguments, it refreshes
the screen every second, showing the top disk I/O processes. Batch mode (-b) can be used to
provide a rolling output (no screen clear); it is demonstrated here with I/O processes only (-o)
and an interval of 5 s (-d5):
# iotop -bod5
Total DISK READ:
TID

PRIO

USER

22400 be/4 root
279 be/3 root

4.78 K/s | Total DISK WRITE:

15.04 M/s

DISK READ

DISK WRITE

IO

4.78 K/s

0.00 B/s

SWAPIN

COMMAND

0.00 % 13.76 % [flush-252:0]

0.00 B/s 1657.27 K/s

0.00 %

9.25 % [jbd2/vda2-8]

22446 be/4 root

0.00 B/s

0.00 %

0.00 % beam.smp -K true ...

Total DISK READ:

0.00 B/s | Total DISK WRITE:

TID

PRIO

USER

10.16 M/s

10.75 M/s

DISK READ

DISK WRITE

SWAPIN

279 be/3 root

0.00 B/s

9.55 M/s

0.00 %

0.01 % [jbd2/vda2-8]

IO

COMMAND

22446 be/4 root

0.00 B/s

10.37 M/s

0.00 %

0.00 % beam.smp -K true ...

646 be/4 root

0.00 B/s

272.71 B/s

0.00 %

0.00 % rsyslogd -n -c 5

[...]

The output shows the beam.smp process (Riak) performing a disk write workload of around 10
Mbytes/s. The columns include:
■

DISK READ: Read Kbytes/s

■

DISK WRITE: Write Kbytes/s

■

SWAPIN: Percent of time the thread spent waiting for swap-in I/O

■

IO: Percent of time the thread spent waiting for I/O

iotop(8) supports various other options, including -a for accumulated statistics (instead of
per-interval), -p PID to match a process, and -d SEC to set the interval.
I recommend that you test iotop(8) with a known workload and check that the numbers match.
I just tried (iotop version 0.6) and found that it greatly undercounts write workloads. You can also
use biotop(8), which uses a different instrumentation source and does match my test workload.

biotop
biotop(8) is a BCC tool, and is another top(1) for disks. Example output:
# biotop
Tracing... Output every 1 secs. Hit Ctrl-C to end
08:04:11 loadavg: 1.48 0.87 0.45 1/287 14547
PID

COMM

D MAJ MIN DISK

I/O

Kbytes

AVGms

14501

cksum

R 202 1

361

28832

3.39

xvda1

473

474

Chapter 9 Disks

6961

dd

R 202 1

xvda1

1628

13024

0.59

13855

dd

R 202 1

xvda1

1627

13016

0.59

326

jbd2/xvda1-8

W 202 1

xvda1

3

168

3.00

1880

supervise

W 202 1

xvda1

2

8

6.71

1873

supervise

W 202 1

xvda1

2

8

2.51

1871

supervise

W 202 1

xvda1

2

8

1.57

1876

supervise

W 202 1

xvda1

2

8

1.22

[...]

This shows cksum(1) and dd(1) commands performing reads, and supervise processes performing
some writes. This is a quick way to identify who is performing disk I/O, and by how much. The
columns are:
■

PID: Cached process ID (best effort)

■

COMM: Cached process name (best effort)

■

D: Direction (R == read, W == write)

■

MAJ MIN: Disk major and minor numbers (a kernel identifier)

■

DISK: Disk name

■

I/O: Number of disk I/O during interval

■

Kbytes: Total disk throughput during interval (Kbytes)

■

AVGms: Average time for the I/O (latency) from the issue to the device, to its completion
(milliseconds)

By the time disk I/O is issued to the device, the requesting process may no longer be on CPU, and
identifying it can be difficult. biotop(8) uses a best-effort approach: the PID and COMM columns
will usually match the correct process, but this is not guaranteed.
biotop(8) supports optional interval and count columns (the default interval is one second), -C
to not clear the screen, and -r MAXROWS to specify the top number of processes to display.

9.6.9

biostacks

biostacks(8)14 is a bpftrace tool that traces the block I/O request time (from OS enqueue to device
completion) with the I/O initialization stack trace. For example:
# biostacks.bt
Attaching 5 probes...
Tracing block I/O with init stacks. Hit Ctrl-C to end.
^C
[...]

14

Origin: I created it on 19-Mar-2019 for [Gregg 19].

9.6 Observability Tools

@usecs[
blk_account_io_start+1
blk_mq_make_request+1069
generic_make_request+292
submit_bio+115
submit_bh_wbc+384
ll_rw_block+173
ext4_bread+102
__ext4_read_dirblock+52
ext4_dx_find_entry+145
ext4_find_entry+365
ext4_lookup+129
lookup_slow+171
walk_component+451
path_lookupat+132
filename_lookup+182
user_path_at_empty+54
sys_access+175
do_syscall_64+115
entry_SYSCALL_64_after_hwframe+61
]:
[2K, 4K)

2 |@@

[4K, 8K)

37 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@|

|

[8K, 16K)

15 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

|

[16K, 32K)

9 |@@@@@@@@@@@@

|

[32K, 64K)

1 |@

|

The output shows a latency histogram (in microseconds) for disk I/O, along with the requesting
I/O stack: via the access(2) syscall, filename_lookup(), and ext4_lookup(). This I/O was caused
by looking up pathnames during file permission checks. The output included many such stacks,
and these show that I/O are caused by activity other than reads and writes.
I have seen cases where there was mysterious disk I/O without any application causing it. The
reason turned out to be background file system tasks. (In one case it was ZFS’s background scrubber, which periodically verifies checksums.) biostacks(8) can identify the real reason for disk I/O
by showing the kernel stack trace.

9.6.10

blktrace

blktrace(8) is a custom tracing facility for block device I/O events on Linux that uses the kernel
blktrace tracer. This is a specialized tracer controlled via BLKTRACE ioctl(2) syscalls to disk
device files. The frontend tools include blktrace(8), blkparse(1), and btrace(8).

475

476

Chapter 9 Disks

blktrace(8) enables kernel block driver tracing and retrieves the raw trace data, which can be
processed using blkparse(1). For convenience, the btrace(8) tool runs both blktrace(8) and
blkparse(1), such that the following are equivalent:
# blktrace -d /dev/sda -o - | blkparse -i # btrace /dev/sda

blktrace(8) is a low-level tool that shows multiple events per I/O.

Default Output
The following shows the default output of btrace(8) and captures a single disk read event by the
cksum(1) command:
# btrace /dev/sdb
8,16

3

1

0.429604145 20442

A

R 184773879 + 8 <- (8,17) 184773816

8,16

3

2

0.429604569 20442

Q

R 184773879 + 8 [cksum]

8,16

3

3

0.429606014 20442

G

R 184773879 + 8 [cksum]

8,16

3

4

0.429607624 20442

P

N [cksum]

8,16

3

5

0.429608804 20442

I

R 184773879 + 8 [cksum]

8,16

3

6

0.429610501 20442

U

N [cksum] 1

8,16

3

7

0.429611912 20442

D

R 184773879 + 8 [cksum]

8,16

1

1

0.440227144

C

R 184773879 + 8 [0]

0

[...]

Eight lines of output were reported for this single disk I/O, showing each action (event) involving
the block device queue and the device.
By default, there are seven columns:
1. Device major, minor number
2. CPU ID
3. Sequence number
4. Action time, in seconds
5. Process ID
6. Action identifier: the type of event (see the Action Identifiers heading)
7. RWBS description: I/O flags (see the RWBS Description heading)
These output columns may be customized using the -f option. They are followed by custom
data based on the action.
The final data depends on the action. For example, 184773879 + 8 [cksum] means an I/O at
block address 184773879 with size 8 (sectors), from the process named cksum.

9.6 Observability Tools

Action Identifiers
These are described in the blkparse(1) man page:
A

IO was remapped to a different device

B

IO bounced

C

IO completion

D

IO issued to driver

F

IO front merged with request on queue

G

Get request

I

IO inserted onto request queue

M

IO back merged with request on queue

P

Plug request

Q

IO handled by request queue code

S

Sleep request

T

Unplug due to timeout

U

Unplug request

X

Split

This list has been included because it also shows the events that the blktrace framework can
observe.

RWBS Description
For tracing observability, the kernel provides a way to describe the type of each I/O using a character string named rwbs. rwbs is used by blktrace(8) and other disk tracing tools. It is defined in
the kernel blk_fill_rwbs() function and uses the characters:
■

R: Read

■

W: Write

■

M: Metadata

■

S: Synchronous

■

A: Read-ahead

■

F: Flush or force unit access

■

D: Discard

■

E: Erase

■

N: None

The characters can be combined. For example, “WM” is for writes of metadata.

477

478

Chapter 9 Disks

Action Filtering
The blktrace(8) and btrace(8) commands can filter actions to show only the event type of interest.
For example, to trace only the D actions (I/O issued), use the filter option -a issue:
# btrace -a issue /dev/sdb
8,16

1

1

0.000000000

448

D

W 38978223 + 8 [kjournald]

8,16

1

2

0.000306181

448

D

W 104685503 + 24 [kjournald]

8,16

1

3

0.000496706

448

D

W 104685527 + 8 [kjournald]

8,16

1

1

0.010441458 20824

D

R 184944151 + 8 [tar]

[...]

Other filters are described in the blktrace(8) man page, including options to trace only reads (-a
read), writes (-a write), or synchronous operations (-a sync).

Analyze
The blktrace package includes btt(1) to analyze I/O traces. Here is an example invocation, now
using blktrace(8) on /dev/nvme0n1p1 to write trace files (a new directory is used since these
commands create several files):
# mkdir tracefiles; cd tracefiles
# blktrace -d /dev/nvme0n1p1 -o out -w 10
=== nvme0n1p1 ===
CPU

0:

20135 events,

944 KiB data

CPU

1:

38272 events,

1795 KiB data

Total:

58407 events (dropped 0),

2738 KiB data

# blkparse -i out.blktrace.* -d out.bin
259,0

1

1

0.000000000

7113

A

RM 161888 + 8 <- (259,1) 159840

259,0

1

1

0.000000000

7113

A

RM 161888 + 8 <- (259,1) 159840

[...]
# btt -i out.bin
==================== All Devices ====================
ALL

MIN

AVG

MAX

N

--------------- ------------- ------------- ------------- ----------Q2Q

0.000000001

0.000365336

2.186239507

Q2A

0.000037519

0.000476609

0.001628905

24625
1442

Q2G

0.000000247

0.000007117

0.006140020

15914

G2I

0.000001949

0.000027449

0.000081146

602

Q2M

0.000000139

0.000000198

0.000021066

8720

I2D

0.000002292

0.000008148

0.000030147

602

M2D

0.000001333

0.000188409

0.008407029

8720

9.6 Observability Tools

D2C

0.000195685

0.000885833

0.006083538

12308

Q2C

0.000198056

0.000964784

0.009578213

12308

[...]

These statistics are in units of seconds, and show times for each stage of I/O processing.
Interesting times include:
■

Q2C: The total time from the I/O request to completion (time in block layer)

■

D2C: The device issue to completion (disk I/O latency)

■

I2D: The time from device queue insertion to device issue (request queue time)

■

M2D: The time from I/O merge to issue

The output shows an average D2C time of 0.86 ms, and a max M2D of 8.4 ms. Maximums such
as these can cause I/O latency outliers.
For more information, see the btt User Guide [Brunelle 08].

Visualizations
The blktrace(8) tool can record events to trace files that can be visualized using iowatcher(1),
also provided in the blktrace package, and also visualized using Chris Mason’s seekwatcher
[Mason 08].

9.6.11

bpftrace

bpftrace is a BPF-based tracer that provides a high-level programming language, allowing the
creation of powerful one-liners and short scripts. It is well suited for custom disk analysis based
on clues from other tools.
bpftrace is explained in Chapter 15. This section shows some examples for disk analysis: oneliners, disk I/O size, and disk I/O latency.

One-Liners
The following one-liners are useful and demonstrate different bpftrace capabilities.
Count block I/O tracepoints events:
bpftrace -e 'tracepoint:block:* { @[probe] = count(); }'

Summarize block I/O size as a histogram:
bpftrace -e 't:block:block_rq_issue { @bytes = hist(args->bytes); }'

Count block I/O request user stack traces:
bpftrace -e 't:block:block_rq_issue { @[ustack] = count(); }'
bpftrace -e 't:block:block_rq_insert { @[ustack] = count(); }'

479

480

Chapter 9 Disks

Count block I/O type flags:
bpftrace -e 't:block:block_rq_issue { @[args->rwbs] = count(); }'

Trace block I/O errors with device and I/O type:
bpftrace -e 't:block:block_rq_complete /args->error/ {
printf("dev %d type %s error %d\n", args->dev, args->rwbs, args->error); }'

Count SCSI opcodes:
bpftrace -e 't:scsi:scsi_dispatch_cmd_start { @opcode[args->opcode] =
count(); }'

Count SCSI result codes:
bpftrace -e 't:scsi:scsi_dispatch_cmd_done { @result[args->result] = count(); }'

Count SCSI driver functions:
bpftrace -e 'kprobe:scsi* { @[func] = count(); }'

Disk I/O Size
Sometimes disk I/O is slow simply because it is large, especially for SSD drives. Another sizebased issue is when an application requests many small I/O, which instead could be aggregated
into larger sizes to reduce I/O stack overheads. Both of these issues can be investigated by examining the I/O size distribution.
Using bpftrace, the following shows a disk I/O size distribution broken down by the requesting
process name:
# bpftrace -e 't:block:block_rq_issue /args->bytes/ { @[comm] = hist(args->bytes); }'
Attaching 1 probe...
^C
[...]
@[kworker/3:1H]:
[4K, 8K)

1 |@@@@@@@@@@

|

[8K, 16K)

0 |

|

[16K, 32K)

0 |

|

[32K, 64K)

0 |

|

[64K, 128K)

0 |

|

[128K, 256K)

0 |

|

[256K, 512K)

0 |

|

[512K, 1M)

5 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@|

[1M, 2M)

3 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

|

9.6 Observability Tools

@[dmcrypt_write]:
[4K, 8K)

103 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@|

[8K, 16K)

46 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

|

[16K, 32K)

11 |@@@@@

|

[32K, 64K)

0 |

|

[64K, 128K)

1 |

|

[128K, 256K)

1 |

|

The output shows processes named dmcrypt_write performing small I/O, mostly in the 4 to
32 Kbyte range.
The tracepoint block:block_rq_issue shows when I/O were sent to the device driver for delivery to
the disk device. There is no guarantee that the originating process is still on CPU, especially if the
I/O is queued by a scheduler, so the process name shown may be for a later kernel worker thread
that reads I/O from a queue for device delivery. You can switch the tracepoint to block:block_rq_
insert to measure from the insertion of the queue, which may improve the accuracy of the process
name, but it may also miss instrumenting I/O that bypasses queueing (this was also mentioned in
Section 9.6.5, perf).
If you add args->rwbs as a histogram key, the output will be further broken down by I/O type:
# bpftrace -e 't:block:block_rq_insert /args->bytes/ { @[comm, args->rwbs] =
hist(args->bytes); }'
Attaching 1 probe...
^C
[...]
@[dmcrypt_write, WS]:
[4K, 8K)

4 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@|

[8K, 16K)

1 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@

|

[16K, 32K)

0 |

|

[32K, 64K)

1 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@

|

[64K, 128K)

1 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@

|

[128K, 256K)

1 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@

|

[512K, 1M)

8 |@@@@@@@@@@

|

[1M, 2M)

38 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@|

@[dmcrypt_write, W]:

The output now includes W for writes, WS for synchronous writes, etc. See the earlier RWBS
Description section for an explanation of these letters.

481

