18       Chapter 2 Network implementation models




2.1 Protocols
Section 2.1.1 describes the transport protocol TCP and the IP routing protocol. These two examples are
used to provide an abstract model of a protocol and its functions in Section 2.1.2. Section 2.1.3 ends
with common network performance assumptions. Readers familiar with TCP/IP may wish to skip to
Section 2.1.2.


2.1.1 Transport and routing protocols
Applications subcontract the job of reliable delivery to a transport protocol such as the Transmission
Control Protocol (TCP). TCP’s job is to provide the sending and receiving applications with the illusion
of two shared data queues in each direction—despite the fact that the sender and receiver machines
are separated by a lossy network. Thus whatever the sender application writes to its local TCP send
queue should magically appear in the same order at the local TCP receive queue at the receiver, and
vice versa. TCP implements this mechanism by breaking the queued application data into segments
and retransmitting each segment until an acknowledgment (ack) has been received. A more detailed
description of TCP operation can be found in Section A.1.1.
    If the application is (say) a videoconferencing application that does not want reliability guarantees,
it can choose to use a protocol called UDP (User Datagram Protocol) instead of TCP. Unlike TCP, UDP
does not need acks or retransmissions because it does not guarantee reliability.
    Transport protocols such as TCP and UDP work by sending segments from a sender node to a
receiver node across the Internet. The actual job of sending a segment is subcontracted to the Internet
routing protocol IP.
    Internet routing is broken into two conceptual parts, called forwarding and routing. Forwarding is
the process by which packets move from source to destination through intermediate routers. A packet
is a TCP segment together with a routing header that contains the destination Internet address.
    While forwarding must be done at extremely high speeds, the forwarding tables at each router must
be built by a routing protocol, especially in the face of topology changes, such as link failures. There are
several commonly used routing protocols, such as distance vector (e.g., RIP), link state (e.g., OSPF),
and policy routing (e.g., BGP). More details and references to other texts can be found in Section A.1.2
in Appendix.


2.1.2 Abstract protocol model
A protocol is a state machine for all nodes participating in the protocol, together with interfaces and
message formats. A model for a protocol state machine is shown in Fig. 2.1. The specification must
describe how the state machine changes state and responds (e.g., by sending messages, setting timers)
to interface calls, received messages, and timer events.
    For instance, when an application makes a connect request, the TCP sender state machine initializes
by picking an unused initial sequence number, goes to the so-called SYN-SENT state, and sends a
SYN message. As a second example, a link-state routing protocol like OSPF has a state machine at
each router; when a link state packet (LSP) arrives at a router with a higher sequence number than the
last LSP from the source, the new LSP should be stored and sent to all neighbors. While the LSP is very
different from TCP, both protocols can be abstracted by the state machine model shown in Fig. 2.1.
                                                                                        2.1 Protocols            19




FIGURE 2.1
Abstract model of the state machine implementing a protocol at a node participating in a protocol.




FIGURE 2.2
Common protocol functions. The small shaded black box to the lower left represents the state table used by the
protocol.


    This book is devoted to protocol implementations. Besides TCP and IP, this book will consider other
protocols, such as HTTP. Thus, it is worth abstracting out the generic and time-consuming functions
that a protocol state machine performs based on our TCP and routing examples. Such a model, shown
in Fig. 2.2, will guide us through this book.
    First, at the bottom of Fig. 2.2, a protocol state machine must receive and send data packets. This
involves data manipulations, or operations that must read or write every byte in a packet. For instance,
a TCP must copy received data to application buffers, while a router has to switch packets from input
links to output links. The TCP header also specifies a checksum that must be computed over all the data
bytes. Data copying also requires the allocation of resources such as buffers.
    Second, at the top of Fig. 2.2, the state machine must demultiplex data to one of many clients. In
some cases, the client programs must be activated, requiring potentially expensive control transfer. For
instance, when a receiving TCP receives a Web page, it has to demultiplex the data to the Web browser
application using the port number fields and may have to wake up the process running the browser.
20       Chapter 2 Network implementation models



    Fig. 2.2 also depicts several generic functions shared by many protocols. First, protocols have a
crucial state that must be looked up at high speeds and sometimes manipulated. For instance, a received
TCP packet causes TCP to look up a table of connection state, while a received IP packet causes IP
to look up a forwarding table. Second, protocols need to efficiently set timers, for example, to con-
trol retransmission in TCP. Third, if a protocol module is handling several different clients, it needs
to schedule these clients efficiently. For instance, TCP must schedule the processing of different con-
nections, while a router must make sure that unruly conversations between some pair of computers do
not lock out other conversations. Many protocols also allow large pieces of data to be fragmented into
smaller pieces that need reassembly.
    One of the major theses of this book is that though such generic functions are often expensive, their
cost can be mitigated with the right techniques. Thus each generic protocol function is worth studying in
isolation. Therefore after Part 1 of this book, the remaining chapters address specific protocol functions
for endnodes and routers.


2.1.3 Performance environment and measures
This section describes some important measures and performance assumptions. Consider a system
(such as a network or even a single router) where jobs (such as messages) arrive and, after completion,
leave. The two most important metrics in networks are throughput and latency. Throughput roughly
measures the number of jobs completed per second. Latency measures the time (typically the worst
case) to complete a job. System owners (e.g., ISPs, routers) seek to maximize throughput to maximize
revenues, while users of a system want end-to-end latencies lower than a few hundred milliseconds.
Latency also affects the speed of computation across the network, as, for example, in the performance
of a remote procedure call.
    The following performance-related observations about the Internet milieu are helpful when consid-
ering implementation trade-offs.
• Link Speeds: Backbone links are upgrading to 10 Gbps and 40 Gbps, and local links are upgrading
  to gigabit speeds. However, wireless and home links are currently orders of magnitude slower.
• TCP and Web Dominance: Web traffic accounts for over 70% of traffic in bytes or packets. Similarly,
  TCP accounts for 90% of traffic in a recent study (Braun, 1998).
• Small Transfers: Most Web documents accessed are small; for example, a SPEC (Carlton, 1996)
  study shows that 50% of accessed files are 50 kilobytes (KB) or less.
• Poor Latencies: Real round-trip delays exceed speed-of-light limitations; measurements in Crovella
  and Carter (1995) report a mean of 241 msec across the United States compared to speed-of-light
  delays of less than 30 msec. Increased latency can be caused by efforts to improve throughput, such
  as batch compression at modems and pipelining in routers.
• Poor Locality: Backbone traffic studies (Thompson et al., 1997) show 250,000 different source–
  destination pairs (sometimes called flows) passing through a router in a very short duration. More
  recent estimates show around a million concurrent flows. Aggregating groups of headers with the
  same destination address or other means does not reduce the number of header classes significantly.
  Thus locality, or the likelihood of computation invested in a packet being reused on a future packet,
  is small.
• Small Packets: Thompson et al. (1997) also show that roughly half the packets received by a router
  are minimum-size 40-byte TCP acknowledgments. To avoid losing important packets in a stream
                                                                                             2.1 Protocols             21



  of minimum-size packets, most router- and network-adaptor vendors aim for “wire-speed forward-
  ing”—this is the ability to process minimum-size (40-byte) packets at the speed of the input link.1
• Critical Measures: It is worth distinguishing between global performance measures, such as end-
  to-end delay and bandwidth, and local performance measures, such as router lookup speeds. While
  global performance measures are crucial to overall network performance, this book focuses only on
  local performance measures, which are a key piece of the puzzle. In particular, this book focuses on
  forwarding performance and resource (e.g., memory, logic) measures.
• Tools: Most network management tools, such as HP’s OpenView, deal with global measures. The
  tools needed for local measures are tools to measure performance within computers, such as profiling
  software. Examples include Rational’s Quantify (http://www.rational.com) for application soft-
  ware, Intel’s VTune (www.intel.com/software/products/vtune/), and even hardware oscilloscopes.
  Network monitors such as tcpdump (www.tcpdump.org) are also useful.

                                    Case Study 1: SANs and iSCSI
       This case study shows that protocol features can greatly affect application performance. Many
   large data centers connect their disk drives and computers together using a storage area network
   (SAN). This allows computers to share disks. Currently, storage area networks are based on Fiber-
   Channel (Benner, 1995) components, which are more expensive than, say, Gigabit Ethernet. The
   proponents of iSCSI (Internet storage) (Satran et al., 2001) protocols seek to replace FiberChannel
   protocols with (hopefully cheaper) TCP/IP protocols and components.
       SCSI is the protocol used by computers to communicate with local disks. It can also be used
   to communicate with disks across a network. A single SCSI command could ask to read 10
   megabytes (MB) of data from a remote disk. Currently, such remote SCSI commands run over
   a FiberChannel transport protocol implemented in the network adaptors. Thus a 10-MB transfer is
   broken up into multiple FiberChannel packets, sent, delivered, and acknowledged (acked) without
   any per-packet processing by the requesting computer or responding disk.
       The obvious approach to reduce costs is to replace the proprietary FiberChannel transport
   layer with TCP and the FiberChannel network layer with IP. This would allow us to replace ex-
   pensive FiberChannel switches in SANs with commodity Ethernet switches. However, this has
   three implications. First, to compete with FiberChannel performance, TCP will probably have
   to be implemented in hardware. Second, TCP sends and delivers a byte stream (see Fig. A.1 in
   Appendix if needed). Thus multiple sent SCSI messages can be merged at the receiver. Message
   boundaries must be recovered by adding another iSCSI header containing the length of the next
   SCSI message.
       The third implication is trickier. Storage vendors (Satran et al., 2001) wish to process SCSI
   commands out of order. If two independent SCSI messages C1 and C2 are sent in order but the
   C2 data arrives before C1, TCP will buffer C2 until C1 arrives. But the storage enthusiast wishes
   to steer C2 directly to a preallocated SCSI buffer and process C2 out of order, a prospect that
   makes the TCP purist cringe. The length field method described earlier fails for this purpose




1 The preoccupation with wire-speed forwarding in networking is extremely different from the mentality in computer architec-
ture, which is content with optimizing typical (and not worst-case) performance as measured on benchmarks.
22       Chapter 2 Network implementation models



  because a missing TCP segment (containing the SCSI message length) makes it impossible to find
  later message boundaries. An alternate proposal suggests having the iSCSI layer insert headers at
  periodic intervals in the TCP byte stream, but the jury is still out.




2.2 Hardware
As links approach 40-gigabit/sec OC-768 speeds, a 40-byte packet must be forwarded in 8 nsec. At such
speeds, packet forwarding is typically directly implemented in hardware instead of on a programmable
processor. You cannot participate in the design process of such hardware-intensive designs without
understanding the tools and constraints of hardware designers. And yet, a few simple models can allow
you to understand and even play with hardware designs. Even if you have no familiarity with and
have a positive distaste for hardware, you are invited to take a quick tour of hardware design, full of
networking examples to keep you awake.
   Internet lookups are often implemented using combinational logic, Internet packets are stored in
router memories, and an Internet router is put together with components such as switches and lookup
chips. Thus our tour begins with logic implementation, continues with memory internals, and ends
with component-based design. For more details, we refer the reader to the classic VLSI text (Mead
and Conway, 1980), which still wears well despite its age, and the classic computer architecture text
(Hennessey and Patterson, 1996).


2.2.1 Combinatorial logic
Section A.2.1 in Appendix describes very simple models of basic hardware gates, such as NOT, NAND,
and NOR, that can be understood by even a software designer who is willing to read a few pages.
However, even knowing how basic gates are implemented is not required to have some insight into
hardware design.
    The first key to understanding logic design is the following observation. Given NOT, NAND, and
NOR gates, Boolean algebra shows that any Boolean function f (I1 , . . . , In ) of n inputs can be imple-
mented. Each bit of a multibit output can be considered a function of the input bits. Logic minimization
is often used to eliminate redundant gates and sometimes to increase speed. For example, if + denotes
OR and · denotes AND, then the function O = I1 · I2 + I1 · I2 can be simplified to O = I1 .

Example 1. Quality of Service and Priority Encoders: Suppose we have a network router that maintains
n output packet queues for a link, where queue i has higher priority than queue j if i < j . This problem
comes under the category of providing quality of service (QoS), which is covered in Chapter 14. The
transmit scheduler in the router must pick a packet from the first nonempty packet queue in priority
order. Assume the scheduler maintains an N -bit vector (bitmap) I such that I [ j ] = 1 if and only if
queue j is nonempty. Then the scheduler can find the highest-priority nonempty queue by finding the
smallest position in I in which a bit is set. Hardware designers know this function intimately as a
priority encoder. However, even a software designer should realize that this function is feasible for
hardware implementation for reasonable n. This function is examined more closely in Example 2.
                                                                                                   2.2 Hardware     23



2.2.2 Timing and power
To forward a 40-byte packet at OC-768 speeds, any networking function on the packet must complete
in 8 nsec. Thus the maximum signal transmission delay from inputs to outputs on any logic path must
not exceed 8 nsec.2 To ensure this constraint, a model of signal transmission delay in a transistor is
needed.
    Roughly speaking, each logic gate, such as a NAND or NOT gate, can be thought of as a set of
capacitors and resistors that must be charged (when input values change) in order to compute output
values. Worse, charging one input gate can cause the outputs of later gates to charge further inputs,
and so on. Thus for a combinatorial function, the delay to compute the function is the sum of the
charging and discharging delays over the worst-case path of transistors. Such path delays must fit within
a minimum packet arrival time. Besides the time to charge capacitors, another source of delay is wire
delay. More details can be found in Section A.2.2.
    It also takes energy to charge capacitors, where the energy per unit time (power) scales with the
square of the voltage, the capacitance, and the clock frequency at which inputs can change; P = CV 2 f .
While new processes shrink voltage levels and capacitance, higher-speed circuits must increase clock
frequency. Similarly, parallelism implies more capacitors being charged at a time. Thus many high-
speed chips dissipate a lot of heat, requiring nontrivial cooling techniques such as heat sinks. ISPs and
colocation facilities are large consumers of power. While our level of abstraction precludes understand-
ing power trade-offs, it is good to be aware that chips and routers are sometimes power limited. Some
practical limits today are 30 watts per square centimeter on a single die and 10,000 watts per square
foot in a data center.
Example 2. Priority Encoder Design: Consider the problem of estimating timing for the priority en-
coder of Example 1 for an OC-768 link using 40-byte packets. Thus the circuit has 8 nsec to produce
the output. Assume the input I and outputs O are N -bit vectors such that O[j ] = 1 if and only if
I [j ] = 1 and I [k] = 0 for all k < j . Notice that the output is represented in unary (often called 1-hot
representation) rather than binary. The specification leads directly to the combinational logic equation
O[j ] = I [1] . . . I [j − 1]I [j ] for j > 0.
     This design can be implemented directly using N AND gates, one for each output bit, where the N
gates take a number of inputs that range from 1 to N . Intuitively, since N input AND gates take O(N )
transistors, we have a design, Design 1, with O(N 2 ) transistors that appears to take O(1) time.3 Even
this level of design is helpful, though one can do better.
     A more area-economical design is based on the observation that every output bit O[j ] requires
the AND of the complement of the first j − 1 input bits. Thus we define the partial results P [j ] =
I [1] . . . I [j − 1] for j = 2 . . . N. Clearly, O[j ] = I [j ]P [j ]. But P [j ] can be constructed recursively us-
ing the equation P [j ] = P [j − 1]I [j − 1], which can be implemented using N two-input AND gates,
connected in series. This produces a design, Design 2, that takes O(N ) transistors but takes O(N ) time.
     Design 1 is fast and fat, and Design 2 is slow and lean. This is a familiar time–space trade-off
and suggests we can get something in between. The computation of P [j ] in Design 2 resembles an
unbalanced binary tree of height N . However, it is obvious that P [N ] can be computed using a fully


2 Alternatively, parts of the function can be parallelized/pipelined, but then each part must complete in 8 nsec.
3 A more precise argument, due to David Harris, using the method of Sutherland et al. (1999), shows the delay scales as
log(N log N ) because of the effort required to charge a tree of N transistors in each AND gate.
24       Chapter 2 Network implementation models



balanced binary of 2-input AND gates of height log N . A little thought then shows that the partial
results of the binary tree can be combined in simple ways to get P [j ] for all j < N using the same
binary tree (Wang and Huang, 2000).
    For example, if N = 8, to compute P [8] we compute X = I [0] . . . I [3] and Y = I [4] . . . I [7] and
compute the AND of X and Y at the root. Thus, it is easy to calculate P [5], for instance, using one
more AND gate by computing X · I [4]. Such a method is very commonly used by hardware designers
to replace apparently long O(N) computation chains with chains of length 2 log N . Since it was first
used to speed up carry chains in addition, it is known as carry look-ahead or simply look-ahead. While
look-ahead techniques appear complex, even software designers can master them because, at their core,
they use divide-and-conquer.


2.2.3 Raising the abstraction level of hardware design
Hand designing each transistor in a network chip design consisting of 1 million transistors would be
time consuming. The design process can be reduced to a few months using building blocks. A quick
description of building block technologies, such as PLAs, PALs, and standard cells, can be found in
Section A.2.5.
    The high-order bit, however, is that just as software designers reuse code, so also hardware designers
reuse a repertoire of commonly occurring functions. Besides common computational blocks, such as
adders, multipliers, comparators, and priority encoders, designs also use decoders, barrel shifters, mul-
tiplexers, and demultiplexers. It is helpful to be familiar with these “arrows” in the hardware designer’s
quiver.
    A decoder converts a log N -bit binary value to an N -bit unary encoding of the same value; while
binary representations are more compact, unary representations are more convenient for computation.
A barrel shifter shifts an input I by s positions to the left or right, with the bits shifted off from an end
coming around to the other end.
    A multiplexer (mux) connects one of several inputs to a common output, while its dual, the de-
multiplexer, routes one input to one of several possible outputs. More precisely, a multiplexer (mux)
connects one of n input bits Ij to the output O if a log n-bit select signal S encodes the value j in
binary. Its dual, the demultiplexer, connects input I to output Oj if the signal S encodes the value j in
binary.
    Thus the game becomes one of decomposing a complex logic function into instances of the standard
functions, even using recursion when needed. This is exactly akin to reduction and divide-and-conquer
and is easily picked up by software designers. For example, Fig. 2.3 shows the typical Lego puzzle faced
by hardware designers: Build a 4-input multiplexer from 2-input multiplexers. Start by choosing one of
I0 and I1 using a 2-input mux and then choosing one of I2 and I3 by another 2-input mux. Clearly, the
outputs of the 2-input muxes in the first stage must be combined using a third 2-input mux; the only
cleverness required is to realize that the select signal for the first two muxes is the least significant bit
S0 of the 2-bit select signal, while the third mux chooses between the upper and lower halves and so
uses S1 as the select bit.
    The following networking example shows that reduction is a powerful design tool for designing
critical networking functions.
Example 3. Crossbar Scheduling and Programmable Priority Encoders: Examples 1 and 2 motivated
and designed a fast priority encoder (PE). A commonly used router arbitration mechanism uses an
                                                                                       2.2 Hardware             25




FIGURE 2.3
Building a 4-input mux with select bits S0 and S1 from three 2-input muxes. The figure uses the standard trapezoidal
icon for a mux.


enhanced form of priority encoder called a programmable priority encoder (PPE). There is an N -bit
input I as before, together with an additional log N -bit input P . The PPE circuit must compute an
output O such that O[j ] = 1, where j is the first position beyond P (treated as a binary value) that has
a nonzero bit in I . If P = 0, this reduces to a simple priority encoder.
    PPEs arise naturally in switch arbitration (see Chapter 13 for details). For now, suppose a router
connects N communication links. Suppose several input links wish to transmit a packet at the same
time to output link L. To avoid contention at L, each of the inputs sends a request to L in the first time
slot; L chooses which input link to grant a request to in the second slot; the granted input sends a packet
in the third time slot.
    To make its grant decision, L can store the requests received at the end of Slot 1 in an N -bit request
vector R, where R[i] = 1 if input link i wishes to transmit to L. For fairness, L should remember the
last input link P it granted a request to. Then, L should confer the grant to the first input link beyond
P that has a request. This is exactly a PPE problem with R and P as inputs. Since a router must do
arbitration for each time slot and each output link, a fast and area-efficient PPE design is needed. Even
a software designer can understand and possibly repeat the process (Gupta and McKeown, 1999b) used
to design the PPE found in the Tiny Tera, a switch built at Stanford and later commercialized. The basic
idea is reduction: reducing the design of a PPE to the design of a PE (Example 2).
    The first idea is simple. A PPE is essentially a PE whose highest-priority value starts at position P
instead of at 0. A barrel shifter can be used to shift I first to the left by P bits. After this, a simple PE
can be used. Of course, the output-bit vector is now shifted; we recover the original order by shifting
the output of the PE to the right by P bits. A barrel shifter for N -bit inputs can be implemented using a
tree of 2-input multiplexers in around log N time. Thus two barrel shifters and a PE take around 3 log N
gate delays.
    A faster design used in Gupta and McKeown (1999b), which requires only 2 log N gate delays, is
as follows. Split the problem into two parts. If the input has some bit set at position P or greater, then
the result can be found by using a PE operating on the original input after setting to zero all input bits
26        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.4
The Tiny Tera PPE design uses copy 1 of a priority encoder to find the highest bit set, if any, of all bits greater than
P using a mask encoding of P . If such a bit is not found, the output of a second copy of a priority encoder is enabled
using the bottom AND gate. The results of the two copies are then combined using an N-input OR gate.


with positions less than P .4 On the other hand, if the input has no bit set at a position P or greater, then
the result can be found by using a PE on the original input with no masking at all. This results in the
design of Fig. 2.4, which, when tested on a Texas Instrument Cell Library, was nearly twice as fast and
took three times less area than the barrel shifter design for a 32-port router.
    The message here is that the logic design used for a time-critical component of a very influential
switch design can be achieved using simple reductions and simple models. Such models are not beyond
the reach of those of us who do not live and breathe digital design.


2.2.4 Memories
In endnodes and routers, packet forwarding is performed using combinational logic, but packets and
forwarding state are stored in memories. Since memory access times are significantly slower than logic
delays, memories form major bottlenecks in routers and endnodes.


4 This can be done by ANDing the input with P encoded as a mask; such a mask is commonly known in the hardware community
as a thermometer encoding of P .
                                                                                          2.2 Hardware               27



    Further, different subsystems require different memory characteristics. For example, router vendors
feel it is important to buffer 200 msec—an upper bound on a round-trip delay—worth of packets to
avoid dropping packets during periods of congestion. At, say, 40 Gbit/sec per link, such packet buffer-
ing requires an enormous amount of memory. On the other hand, router lookups require a smaller
amount of memory, which is accessed randomly. Thus it helps to have simple models for different
memory technologies. Next, we describe registers, SRAMs, DRAMs, and interleaved memory tech-
nology. Simple implementation models of these memory components can be found in Section A.2.4 in
Appendix.

Registers
A flip-flop is a way of connecting two or more transistors in a feedback loop so that (in the absence of
Writes and power failures) the bit stays indefinitely without “leaking” away. A register is an ordered
collection of flip-flops. For example, most modern processors have a collection of 32- or 64-bit on-chip
registers. A 32-bit register contains 32 flip-flops, each storing a bit. Access from logic to a register on
the same chip is extremely fast, around 0.5–1 nsec.

SRAM
A static random access memory (SRAM) contains N registers addressed by log N address bits A.
SRAM is so named because the underlying flip-flops refresh themselves and so are “static.” Besides
flip-flops, an SRAM also needs a decoder that decodes A into a unary value used to select the right
register. Accessing an SRAM on-chip is only slightly slower than accessing a register because of the
added decode delay. At the time of writing, it was possible to obtain on-chip SRAMs with 0.5-nsec
access times. Access times of 1–2 nsec for on-chip SRAM and 5–10 nsec for off-chip SRAM are
common.

Dynamic RAM
An SRAM bit cell requires at least five transistors. Thus SRAM is always less dense or more expensive
than memory technology based on dynamic RAM (DRAM). The key idea is to replace the feedback
loop (and extra transistors) used to store a bit in a flip-flop with an output capacitance that can store
the bit; thus the charge leaks, but it leaks slowly. Loss due to leakage is fixed by refreshing the DRAM
cell externally within a few milliseconds. Of course, the complexity comes in manufacturing a high
capacitance using a tiny amount of silicon.
    DRAM chips appear to quadruple in capacity every 3 years (Fromm et al., 1997) and are heading
towards 1 gigabit on a single chip. Addressing these bits, even if they are packed together as 4- or even
32-bit “registers,” is tricky. Recall that the address must be decoded from (say) 20 bits to (say) one of
220 values. The complexity of such decode logic suggests divide-and-conquer. Why not decode in two
stages?
    Fig. 2.5 shows that most memories are internally organized two-dimensionally into rows and
columns. The upper address bits are decoded to select the row, and then the lower address bits are
used to decode the column. More precisely, the user first supplies the row address bits and enables a
signal called RAS (row address strobe); later, the user supplies the column address bits,5 and enables

5 Many DRAM chips take advantage of the fact that row and column addresses are not required at the same time to multiplex
row and column addresses on the same set of pins, reducing the pin count of the chip.
28        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.5
Most large memories are organized two-dimensionally in terms of rows and columns. Selecting a word consists of
selecting first the row and then the column within the row.


a signal called CAS (column address strobe). After a specified time, the desired memory word can
be read
      √ out. Assuming equal-size rows and columns, this reduces decode gate complexity from O(N )
to O( (N )) at the expense of one extra decode delay. Besides the required delay between RAS and
CAS, there is also a precharge delay between successive RAS and CAS invocations to allow time for
capacitors to charge.
    The fastest off-chip DRAMs take around 40–60 nsec to access (latency), with longer times, such
as 100 nsec, between successive reads (throughput) because of precharge restrictions. Some of this
latency includes the time to drive the address using external lines onto the DRAM interface pins; recent
innovations allow on-chip DRAM with lower access times of around 30 nsec. It seems clear that DRAM
will always be denser but slower than SRAM.

Page-mode DRAMs
One reason to understand DRAM structure is to understand how function can follow form. A classic
example is a trick to speed up access times called page mode. Page mode is beneficial for access patterns
that exhibit spatial locality, in which adjacent memory words are successively accessed. But having
made a row access in Fig. 2.5, one can access words within the row without incurring additional RAS
and precharge delays. Video RAMs exploit the same structure by having a row read into an SRAM,
which can be read out serially to refresh a display at high speed. Besides page mode and video RAMS,
perhaps there are other ideas that exploit DRAM structure that could be useful in networking.

Interleaved DRAMs
While memory latency is critical for computation speed, memory throughput (often called bandwidth)
is also important for many network applications. Suppose a DRAM has a word size of 32 bits and a
cycle time of 100 nsec. Then the throughput using a single copy of the DRAM is limited to 32 bits
every 100 nsec. Clearly, throughput can be improved using access to multiple DRAMs. As in Fig. 2.6,
multiple DRAMs (called banks) can be strung together on a single bus. The user can start a Read to
                                                                               2.2 Hardware            29




FIGURE 2.6
The idea behind RAMBUS, SDRAM, and numerous variants is to create a single chip containing multiple DRAM
parallel memories to gain memory bandwidth while using only one set of address and data lines.


Bank 1 by placing the address on the address bus. Assume each DRAM bank takes 100 nsec to return
the selected data.
    Instead of idling during this 100-nsec delay, the user can place a second address for Bank 2, a third
for Bank 3, and so on. If the placing of each address takes 10 nsec, the user can “feed” 10 DRAM banks
before the answer to the first DRAM bank query arrives, followed 10 nsec later by the answer to the
second DRAM bank query, and so on. Thus the net memory bandwidth in this example is 10 times the
memory bandwidth of a single DRAM, as long as the user can arrange to have consecutive accesses
touch different banks.
    While using multiple memory banks is a very old idea, it is only in the last 5 years that memory
designers have integrated several banks into a single memory chip (Fig. 2.6), where the address and
data lines for all banks are multiplexed using a common high-speed network called a bus. In addition,
page-mode accesses are often allowed on each bank. Memory technologies based on this core idea
abound, with different values for the DRAM sizes, the protocol to read and write, and the number of
banks. Prominent examples include SDRAM with two banks and RDRAM with 16 banks.
Example 4. Pipelined Flow ID Lookups: A flow is characterized by source and destination IP addresses
and TCP ports. Some customers would like routers to keep track of the number of packets sent by each
network flow, for accounting purposes. This requires a data structure that stores a counter for each flow
ID and supports the two operations of Insert (FlowId) to insert a new flow ID, and Lookup (FlowId)
to find the location of a counter for a flow ID. Lookup requires an exact match on the flow ID—which
is around 96 bits—in the time to receive a packet. This can be done by any exact-matching algorithm,
such as hashing.
    However, if, as many router vendors wish to do, the worst-case lookup time must be small and
bounded, binary search (Cormen et al., 1990) is a better idea. Assume that flow ID lookups must be
done at wire speeds for worst-case 40-byte packets at 2.5 Gbits/sec or OC-48 speeds. Thus the chip has
128 nsec to look up a flow ID.
    To bound lookup delays, consider using a balanced binary tree, such as a B-tree. The logic for
tree traversal is fairly easy. For speed, ideally the flow IDs and counters should be stored in SRAM.
30        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.7
Solving the flow ID lookup problem by using a pipelined lookup chip that works on up to 16 concurrent flow ID
lookups, each of which accesses an independent bank of the RDRAM. The lookup chip returns an index to, say,
a network processor that updates the flow ID counter.



However, current estimates in core routers (Thompson et al., 1997) show around a million concurrent
flows. Keeping state for a million flows in SRAM is expensive. However, plain DRAM using a binary
tree with a branching factor of 2 would require log2 1,000,000 = 20 memory accesses. Even assuming
an optimistic DRAM cycle time of 50 nsec, the overall lookup time is 1 usec, which is too slow.
    A solution is to use pipelining, as shown in Fig. 2.7, where the pipelined logic accesses flow IDs
stored in an RDRAM with 16 banks of memory, as shown in Fig. 2.6. All the nodes at height i in the
binary tree are stored in Bank i of the RDRAM. The lookup chip works on 16 flow ID lookups (for
16 packets) concurrently. For example, after looking at the root node for Packet 1 in Bank 1, the chip
can look up the second-level tree node for Packet 1 in Bank 2 and (very slightly after that) look up the
root for Packet 2 in Bank 1. When Packet 1’s lookup “thread” is accessing Bank 16, Packet 16’s lookup
thread is accessing Bank 1. Since direct RDRAM runs at 800 MHz, the time between address requests
to the RAMBUS is small compared with the read access time of around 60 nsec. Thus while a single
packet takes around 16 ∗ 60 nsec to complete, processing 16 packets concurrently allows a throughput
of one flow ID lookup every 60 nsec.
    Unfortunately, a binary tree with 16 levels allows only 216 = 64 K flow IDs, which is too small.
Fortunately, RAMBUS allows a variation of page mode where 8 data words of 32 bits can be accessed
in almost the same time as 1 word. This allows us to retrieve two 96-bit keys and three 20-bit pointers
in one 256-bit memory access. Thus a tree with 3-way branching can be used, which allows potentially
316 , or potentially 43 million, flow IDs.


2.2.5 Memory subsystem design techniques
The flow ID lookup problem illustrates three major design techniques commonly used in memory
subsystem designs for networking chips.
• Memory Interleaving and Pipelining: Similar techniques are used in IP lookup, classification, and
  in scheduling algorithms that implement QoS. The multiple banks can be implemented using several
  external memories, a single external memory like a RAMBUS, or on-chip SRAM within a chip that
  also contains processing logic.
                                                                                          2.2 Hardware               31



• Wide Word Parallelism: A common theme in many networking designs, such as the Lucent bit
  vector scheme (Chapter 12), is to use wide memory words that can be processed in parallel. This
  can be implemented using DRAM and exploiting page mode or by using SRAM and making each
  memory word wider.
• Combining DRAM and SRAM: Given that SRAM is expensive and fast and that DRAM is cheap
  and slow, it makes sense to combine the two technologies to attempt to obtain the best of both
  worlds. While the use of SRAM as a cache for DRAM databases is classical, there are many more
  creative applications of the idea of a memory hierarchy. For instance, the exercises explore the effect
  of a small amount of SRAM on the design of the flow ID lookup chip. Chapter 16 describes a more
  unusual application of this technique to implement a large number of counters, where the low-order
  bits of each counter are stored in SRAM.
It is more important for a novice designer to understand these design techniques (than to know memory
implementation details) in order to produce creative hardware implementations of networking func-
tions.


2.2.6 Component-level design
The methods of the last two subsections can be used to implement a state machine that implements
arbitrary computation. A state machine has a current state stored in memory; the machine processes
inputs using combinatorial logic that reads the current state and possibly writes the state. An example
of a complex state machine is a Pentium processor, whose state is the combination of registers, caches,
and main memory. An example of a simpler state machine is the flow ID lookup chip of Fig. 2.7, whose
state is the registers used to track each of 16 concurrent lookups and the RDRAM storing the B-tree.
    While a few key chips may have to be designed to build a router or a network interface card, the
remainder of the design can be called component-level design: organizing and interconnecting chips
on a board and placing the board in a box while paying attention to form factor, power, and cooling. A
key aspect of the component-level design is understanding pin-count limitations, which often provide a
quick “parity check” on feasible designs.

Example 5. Pin-Count Implications for Router Buffers: Consider a router that has forty 10 Gb/sec
links. The overall buffering required is 200 msec * 400 Gb/sec, which is 80 gigabits. For cost and
power, we use DRAM for packet buffers. Since each packet must go in and out of the buffer, the overall
memory bandwidth needs to be twice the bandwidth into the box—i.e., 800 Gb/sec. Assuming 100%
overhead for internal packet headers, links between packets in queues, and wasted memory bandwidth,
it is reasonable to aim for 1600-Gb/sec memory bandwidth.
     Using a single direct 64-bit-wide RDRAM with 16 banks, specifications show peak memory band-
width of 1.28 GB/sec,6 or 10.24 Gb/sec. Accessing each RDRAM requires 64 interface pins for data
and 25 other pins for address and control, for a total of roughly 90 pins. A 1600-Gbps memory band-
width requires 160 RDRAMs, which require 14400 pins in total. A conservative upper bound on the
number of pins on a chip is around 1000. This implies that even if the router vendor were to build an


6 Assuming the DRAM takes 100 ns between reads, if the width is 64 bits (8 bytes), with a single bank we can read 8 bytes
every 100 ns (as mentioned on page 28), or 0.08 GB/sec.
32        Chapter 2 Network implementation models



extremely fast custom-designed packet-forwarding chip that could handle all packets at the maximum
box rate, one would still need at least one more chip to drive data in and out of the RAMBUS packet
buffers. Our message is that pin limitations are a key constraint in partitioning a design between chips.


2.2.7 Final hardware lessons
If all else is forgotten in this hardware design section, it is helpful to remember the design techniques
of Section 2.2.5. Knowledge of the following parameter values is also useful to help system designers
quickly weed out infeasible designs without detailed knowledge of hardware design. Unfortunately,
these parameters are a moving target, and the following numbers were written based on technology
available in 2004.
• Chip Complexity Scaling: The number of components per chip appears to double every 2 years.
  While 0.13-micron processes are common, 90-nm technology is ramping up, and 65-nm technology
  is expected after that. As a result, current ASICs can pack several million gate equivalents (that’s
  a lot of combinatorial logic) plus up to 50 Mbits (at the time of writing, using half a 12-mm/side
  die) of on-chip SRAM on an ASIC.7 Embedded DRAM is also a common option to get more space
  on-chip at the cost of larger latency.
• Chip Speeds: As feature sizes go down, on-chip clock speeds of 1 GHz are becoming common, with
  some chips even pushing close to 3 GHz. To put this in perspective, the clock cycle to do a piece
  of computation on a 1-GHz chip is 1 nsec. By using parallelism via pipelining and wide memory
  words, multiple operations can be performed per clock cycle.
• Chip I/O: The number of pins per chip grows, but rather slowly. While there are some promising
  technologies, it is best to assume that designs are pin limited to around 1000 pins.
• Serial I/O: Chip-to-chip I/O has also come a long way, with 10-Gbit serial links available to connect
  chips.
• Memory Scaling: On-chip SRAM with access times of 1 nsec are available, with even smaller ac-
  cess times being worked on. Off-chip SRAM with access times of 2.5 nsec are commonly available.
  On-chip DRAM access times are around 30 nsec, while off-chip DRAM of around 60 nsec is com-
  mon. Of course, the use of interleaved DRAM, as discussed in the memory subsection, is a good
  way to increase memory subsystem throughput for certain applications. DRAM costs roughly 4–10
  times less than SRAM per bit.
• Power and Packaging: The large power consumption of high-speed routers requires careful de-
  sign of the cooling system. Finally, most ISPs have severe rack space limitations, and so there is
  considerable pressure to build routers that have small form factors.
    These parameter values have clear implications for high-speed networking designs. For instance,
at OC-768 speeds, a 40-byte packet arrives in 3.2 nsec. Thus it seems clear that all states required to
process the packet must be in on-chip SRAM. While the amount of on-chip SRAM is growing, this
memory is not growing as fast as the number of flows seen by a router. Similarly, with 1-nsec SRAMs,
at most, three memory accesses can be made to a single memory bank in a packet arrival time.
    Thus the design techniques of Section 2.2.5 must be used within a chip to gain parallelism using
multiple memory banks and wide words and to increase the usable memory by creative combinations

7 FPGAs are more programmable chips that can only offer smaller amounts of on-chip SRAM.
                                                                     2.3 Network device architectures                         33



that involve off- and on-chip memory. However, given that chip densities and power constraints limit
parallelism to, say, a factor of at most 60, the bottom line is that all packet-processing functions at high
speeds must complete using at most 200 memory accesses and limited on-chip memory.8 Despite these
limitations, a rich variety of packet-processing functions have been implemented at high speeds.



2.3 Network device architectures
Optimizing network performance requires optimizing the path of data through the internals of the
source node, the sink node, and every router. Thus it is important to understand the internal archi-
tecture of endnodes and routers. The earlier part of this chapter argued that logic and memory can
be combined to form state machines. In essence, both routers and endnodes are state machines. How-
ever, their architectures are optimized for different purposes: endnode architectures (Section 2.3.1) for
general computation and router architectures (Section 2.3.2) for Internet communication.


2.3.1 Endnode architecture
A processor such as a Pentium is a state machine that takes a sequence of instructions and data as
input and writes output to I/O devices, such as printers and terminals. To allow programs that have a
large state space, the bulk of the processor state is stored externally in cheap DRAM. In PCs, this is
referred to as main memory and is often implemented using 1 GB or more of interleaved DRAM, such
as SDRAM. However, recall that DRAM access times are large, say, 60 nsec. If the processor state
were stored only in DRAM, an instruction would take 60 nsec to read or write to memory.
    Processors gain speed using caches, which are comparatively small chunks of SRAM that can store
commonly used pieces of state for faster access. Some SRAM (i.e., the L1 cache) is placed on the
processor chip, and some more SRAM (i.e., the L2 cache) is placed external to the processor. A cache
is a hash table that maps between memory address locations and contents. CPU caches use a simple
hash function: They extract some bits from the address to index into an array and then search in parallel
for all the addresses that map into the array element.9 When a memory location has to be read from
DRAM, it is placed in the cache, and an existing cache element may be evicted. Commonly used data
is stored in a data cache, and commonly used instructions in an instruction cache.
    Caching works well if the instructions and data exhibit temporal locality (i.e., the corresponding
location is reused frequently in a small time period) or spatial locality (i.e., accessing a location is
followed by access to a nearby location). Spatial locality is taken advantage of as follows. Recall that
accessing a DRAM location involves accessing a row R and then a column within the row. Thus reading
words within row R are cheaper after R is accessed. A Pentium takes advantage of this observation by
prefetching 128 (cache line size) contiguous bits into the cache whenever 32 bits of data are accessed.
Access to the adjoining 96 bits will not incur a cache miss penalty.


8 Of course, there are ways to work around these limits, for instance, by using multiple chips, but such implementations often
do badly in terms of cost, complexity, and power consumption.
9 The number of elements that can be searched in parallel in a hash bucket is called the associativity of the cache. While
router designers rightly consider bit extraction to be a poor hash function, the addition of associativity improves overall hashing
performance, especially on computing workloads.
34       Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.8
Model of a workstation.


    Many computing benchmarks exhibit temporal and spatial locality; however, a stream of packets
probably exhibits only spatial locality. Thus improving endnode protocol implementations often re-
quires paying attention to cache effects.
    The foregoing discussion should set the stage for the endnode architecture model shown in Fig. 2.8.
The processor, or CPU—e.g., a Pentium or an Alpha—sits on a bus. A bus can be thought of as a
network like an Ethernet, but optimized for the fact that the devices on the bus are close to each other.
The processor interacts with other components by sending messages across the bus.
    The input–output (I/O) devices are typically memory mapped. In other words, even I/O devices like
the network adaptor and the disk look like pieces of memory. For example, the adaptor memory may
be mapped to 100–200 in the memory address space. This allows uniform communication between
the CPU and any device by using the same conventions used to interact with memory. In terms of
networking, a Read (or Write) can be thought of as a message sent on the bus addressed to the memory
location. Thus a Read 100 is sent on the bus, and the device that owns memory location 100 (e.g., the
adaptor) will receive the message and reply with the contents of location 100.
    Modern machines allow direct memory access (DMA), where devices such as the disk or the net-
work adaptor send Reads and Writes directly to the memory via the bus without processor intervention.
However, only one entity can use the bus at a time. Thus the adaptor has to contend for the bus; any
device that gets hold of the bus “steals cycles” from the processor. This is because the processor is
forced to wait to access memory while a device is sending messages across the bus.
    In Fig. 2.8, also notice that the adaptor actually sits on a different bus (system bus or memory bus)
from the bus on which the network adaptor and other peripherals (I/O bus) sit. The memory bus is
designed for speed and is redesigned for every new processor; the I/O bus is a standard bus (e.g., a PCI
bus) chosen to stay compatible with older I/O devices. Thus the I/O bus is typically slower than the
memory bus.
    A big lesson for networking in Fig. 2.8 is that the throughput of a networking application is crucially
limited by the speed of the slowest bus, typically the I/O bus. Worse, the need for extra copies to
preserve operating system structure causes every packet received or sent by a workstation to traverse
the bus multiple times. Techniques to avoid redundant bus traversals are described in Chapter 5.
    Modern processors are heavily pipelined with instruction fetch, instruction decode, data reads, and
data writes split into separate stages. Superscalar and multithreaded machines go beyond pipelining
                                                             2.3 Network device architectures                   35




FIGURE 2.9
Using parallel connections within an endnode architecture to allow concurrent processing and network traffic via a
parallel switch.



by issuing multiple instructions concurrently. While these innovations (see, for example, the classic
reference on endnode architecture [Hennessey and Patterson, 1996]) remove computation bottlenecks,
they do little for data-movement bottlenecks. Consider the following speculative architecture instead.

Example 6. Endnode Architecture Using a Crossbar Switch: Fig. 2.9 shows the endnode bus being
replaced by a programmable hardware switch, as is commonly used by routers. The switch internally
contains a number of parallel buses so that any set of disjoint endpoint pairs can be connected in parallel
by the switch. Thus in the figure, the processor is connected to Memory 1, while the network adaptor is
connected to Memory 2. Thus packets from the network can be placed in Memory 2 without interfering
with the processor’s reading from Memory 1. If the processor now wishes to read the incoming packet,
the switch can be reprogrammed to connect the processor to Memory 2 and the adaptor to Memory 1.
This can work well if the queue of empty packet buffers used by the adaptor alternates between the two
memories.
    There are recent proposals for Infiniband switch technology to replace the I/O bus in processors
(Chapter 5). The ultimate message of this example is not that architectures such as Fig. 2.9 are nec-
essarily good but that simple architectural idea to improve network performance, such as Fig. 2.9,
are not hard for even protocol designers to conceive, given simple models of hardware and architec-
ture.


2.3.2 Router architecture
A router model that covers both high-end routers (such as Juniper’s M-series routers) and low-end
routers (such as the Cisco Catalyst) is shown in Fig. 2.10. Basically, a router is a box with a set of input
links, shown on the left, and a set of output links, shown on the right; the task of the router is to switch
a packet from an input link to the appropriate output link based on the destination address in the packet.
While the input and output links are shown separately, the two links in each direction between two
routers are often packaged together. We review three main bottlenecks in a router: lookup, switching,
and output queuing.
36        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.10
A model of a router labeled with the three main bottlenecks in the forwarding path: address lookup (B1), switching
(B2), and output scheduling (B3).


Lookup
A packet arrives on, say, the left link, input link i. Every packet carries a 32-bit Internet Protocol (IP)
address.10 Assume that the first six bits of the destination address of a sample packet are 100100. A
processor in the router inspects the destination address to determine where to forward the packet.
    The processor consults a forwarding table to determine the output link for the packet. The forward-
ing table is sometimes called a FIB, for forwarding information base. The FIB contains a set of prefixes
with corresponding output links. The reason for prefixes will be explained in Chapter 11; for now, think
of prefixes as variable-length “area codes” that greatly reduce the FIB size. A prefix like 01*, where the
* denotes the usual “don’t care” symbol, matches IP addresses that start with 01. Assume that prefix
100* has associated output link 6, while prefix 1* has output link 2. Thus our sample packet, whose
destination address starts with 100100, matches both prefixes 100* and 1*. The disambiguating rule
that IP routers use is to match an address to the longest matching prefix. Assuming no longer matching
prefixes, our sample packet should be forwarded to output link 6.
    The processor that does the lookup and basic packet processing can be either shared or dedicated
and can be either a general processor or a special-purpose chip. Early router designs used a shared
processor (or processors), but this proved to be a bottleneck. Later designs, including Cisco’s GSR
family, use a dedicated processor per input link interface. The earliest designs used a standard CPU
processor, but many of the fastest routers today, such as Juniper’s M-160, use a dedicated chip (ASIC)
with some degree of programmability. There has been a backlash to this trend toward ASICs, however,
with customers asking routers to perform new functions, such as Web load balancing. Thus some new
routers use network processors (see Example 7), which are general-purpose processors optimized for
networking.


10 Recall that while most users deal with domain names, these names are translated to an IP address by a directory service,
called DNS, before packets are sent.
                                                                     2.3 Network device architectures                         37



    Algorithms for prefix lookups are described in Chapter 11. Many routers today also offer a more
complex lookup called packet classification (Chapter 12), where the lookup takes as input the destina-
tion address as well as source address and TCP ports.

Switching
After address lookup in the example of Fig. 2.10, the processor instructs an internal switching system
to transfer the packet from link i to output link 6. In older processors, the switch was a simple bus,
such as shown in Fig. 2.8. This proved to be a major bottleneck because, if the switch has N input links
running at B bits per second, the bus would have to have a bandwidth of B · N . Unfortunately, as N
increases, electrical effects (such as the capacitive load of a bus) predominate, limiting the bus speed.
    Thus the fastest routers today internally use a parallel switch of the sort shown in Fig. 2.9. The
throughput of the switch is increased by using N parallel buses, one for each input and one for each
output. An input and an output are connected by turning on transistors connecting the corresponding
input bus and output bus. While it is easy to build the data path, it is harder to schedule the switch, be-
cause multiple inputs may wish to send to the same output link at the same time. The switch-scheduling
problem boils down to matching available inputs and outputs every packet arrival time. Algorithms for
this purpose are described in Chapter 13.

Queuing
Once the packet in Fig. 2.10 has been looked up and switched to output link 6, output link 6 may be
congested, and thus the packet may have to be placed in a queue for output link 6. Many older routers
simply place the packet in a first-in-first-out (FIFO) transmission queue. However, some routers employ
more sophisticated output scheduling to provide fair bandwidth allocation and delay guarantees. Output
scheduling is described in Chapter 14.
    Besides the major tasks of lookups, switching, and queuing, there are a number of other tasks that
are less time-critical.

Header validation and checksums
The version number of a packet is checked, and the header-length field is checked for options. Options
are additional processing directives that are rarely used; such packets are often shunted to a separate
route processor. The header also has a simple checksum that must be verified. Finally, a time-to-live
(TTL) field must be decremented and the header checksum recalculated. Chapter 9 shows how to
incrementally update the checksum. Header validation and checksum computation are often done in
hardware.

Route processing
Section A.1.2 describes briefly how routers build forwarding tables using routing protocols. Routers
within domains implement RIP and OSPF, while routers that link domains also must implement BGP.11


11 It is possible to buy versions of these protocols, but the software must be customized for each new hardware platform. A more
insidious problem, especially with BGP and OSPF, is that many of the first implementations of these protocols vary in subtle
ways from the actual specifications. Thus a new implementation that meets the specification may not interoperate with existing
routers. Thus ISPs are reluctant to buy new routers unless they can trust the “quality” of the BGP code, in terms of its ability to
interoperate with existing routers.
38         Chapter 2 Network implementation models



These protocols are implemented in one or more route processors. For example, when a LSP is sent
to the router in Fig. 2.10, lookup will recognize that this is a packet destined for the router itself and
will cause the packet to be switched to the route processor. The route processor maintains the link-state
database and computes shortest paths; after computation, the route processor loads the new forwarding
databases in each of the forwarding processors through either the switch or a separate out-of-band path.
    In the early days, Cisco won its spurs by processing not just Internet packets but also other routing
protocols, such as DECNET, SNA, and AppleTalk. The need for such multiprotocol processing is less
clear now. A much more important trend is multi-protocol-label switching (MPLS), which appears to
be de rigeur for core routers. In MPLS, the IP header is augmented with a header containing simple
integer indices that can be looked up directly without a prefix lookup; Chapter 11 provides more details
about MPLS.

Protocol processing
All routers today have to implement the simple network management protocol (SNMP) and provide a
set of counters that can be inspected remotely. To allow remote communication with the router, most
routers also implement TCP and UDP. In addition, routers have to implement the Internet control mes-
sage protocol (ICMP), which is basically a protocol for sending error messages, such as “time-to-live
exceeded.”

Fragmentation, redirects, and ARPs
While it is clear that route and protocol processing is best relegated to a route processor on a so-called
“slow path,” there are a few router functions that are more ambiguous. For example, if a packet of 3000
bytes is to be sent over a link with a maximum packet size (MTU) of 1500 bytes, the packet has to
be fragmented into two pieces.12 While the prevailing trend is for sources, instead of routers, to do
fragmentation, some routers do fragmentation in the fast path. Another such function is the sending of
Redirects. If an endnode sends a message to the wrong router, the router is supposed to send a Redirect
back to the endnode. A third such function is the sending of address resolution protocol (ARP) requests,
whose operation is explored in the exercises.
    Finally, routers today have a number of other tasks they may be called on to perform. Many routers
within enterprises do content-based handling of packets, where the packet processing depends on
strings found in the packet data. For example, a router that fronts a Web farm of many servers may
wish to forward packets with the same Web URL to the same Web server. There are also the issues of
accounting and traffic measurement. Some of these new services are described in Chapter 16.
Example 7. Network Processors: Network processors are general-purpose programmable processors
optimized for network traffic. Their proponents say that they are needed because the unpredictable
nature of router tasks (such as content-based delivery) makes committing router forwarding to silicon a
risky proposition. For example, the Intel IXP1200 network processor evaluated in Spalink et al. (2000)
internally contains six processors, each running at 177 MHz with a 5.6-nsec clock cycle. Each processor
receives packets from an input queue; packets are stored in a large DRAM; after the processor has
looked up the packet destination, the packet is placed on the output queue with a tag describing the
output link it should be forwarded to.


12 Strictly speaking, since each fragment adds headers, there will be three pieces.
                                                                    2.4 Operating systems              39



    The biggest problem is that the processors are responsible for moving packets in and out of DRAM.
In the IXP1200, moving 32 bytes from the queue to the DRAM takes 45 clock cycles, and moving from
the DRAM to the queue takes 55 cycles. Since a minimum-size packet is at least 40 bytes, this requires
a total of 200 cycles = 1.12 usec, which translates to a forwarding rate of only around 900 K pack-
ets/second. The IXP1200 gets around this limit by using six parallel processors and an old architectural
idea called multithreading. The main idea is that each processor works on multiple packets, each packet
being a thread; when the processing for one packet stalls because of a memory reference, processing
for the next thread is resumed. Using fast context switching between threads, and four contexts per
processor, the IXP1200 can theoretically obtain 6 * 4 * 900 K = 21.6 M packets/second.
    Network processors also offer special-purpose instructions for address lookup and other common
forwarding functions. Some network processors also streamline the movement of data packets by hav-
ing hardware engines that present only the header of each data packet to the processor. The remainder
of the data packet flows directly to the output queue. The processor(s) read the header, do the lookup,
and write the updated header to the output queue. The hardware magically glues together the updated
header with the original packet and keeps all packets in order. While this approach avoids the move-
ment of the remainder of the packet through the processor, it does nothing for the case of minimum-size
packets.

                            Case Study 2: Buffering and optical switching
      As fiber-optic links scale to higher speeds, electronics implementing combinational logic and
  memories in core routers becomes a bottleneck. Currently, packets arrive over fiber-optic links
  with each bit encoded as a light pulse. Optics at the receiver convert light to electrical pulses; the
  packet is then presented to forwarding logic implemented electronically. The packet is then queued
  to an outbound link for transmission, upon which the transmitting link optics convert electrical
  bits back to light. The electronic bottleneck can be circumvented by creating an all-optical router
  without any electro-optical conversions.
      Unfortunately, doing IP lookups optically, and especially building dense optical packet mem-
  ories, seems hard today. But switching light between several endpoints is feasible. Thus the
  numerous start-ups in the buzzing optical space tend to build optical circuit switches that use
  electronics to set up the circuit switch. A circuit switch connects input X to output Y for a large
  duration, as opposed to the duration of a single packet as in a packet switch. Such circuit switches
  have found use as a flexible “core” of an ISP’s network to connect conventional routers. If traf-
  fic between, say, routers R1 and R2 increases, an ISP operator can (at a large time scale of, say,
  minutes) change the circuit switches to increase the bandwidth of the R1-to-R2 path. However,
  the wastefulness of reserving switch paths for small flow durations makes it likely that packet-
  switched routers will continue to be popular in the near future.




2.4 Operating systems
An operating system is a software that sits above hardware in order to make life easier for application
programmers. For most Internet routers, time-critical packet forwarding runs directly on the hardware
(Fig. 2.10) and is not mediated by an operating system. Less time-critical code runs on a router oper-
40        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.11
The programmer sees the illusion of an uninterrupted timeline shown above, while the real processor timeline may
switch back and forth between several processes.


ating system that is stripped down, such as Cisco’s IOS. However, to improve end-to-end performance
for, say, Web browsing, an implementor needs to understand the costs and benefits of operating systems.
    Abstractions are idealizations or illusions we invent to deal with the perversity and irregularity of
the real world. To finesse the difficulties of programming on a bare machine, operating systems offer
abstractions to application programmers. Three central difficulties of dealing with raw hardware are
dealing with interruptions, managing memory, and controlling I/O devices. To deal with these diffi-
culties, operating systems offer the abstractions of uninterrupted computation, infinite memory, and
simple I/O.
    A good abstraction increases programmer productivity but has two costs. First, the mechanism im-
plementing the abstraction has a price. For example, scheduling processes can cause overhead for a Web
server. A second, less obvious cost is that the abstraction can hide power, preventing the programmer
from making optimal use of resources. For example, operating system memory management may pre-
vent the programmer of an Internet lookup algorithm from keeping the lookup data structure in memory
in order to maximize performance. We now provide a model of the costs and underlying mechanisms of
the process (Section 2.4.1), virtual memory (Section 2.4.2), and I/O (Section 2.4.3) abstractions. More
details can be found in Tanenbaum (1992).


2.4.1 Uninterrupted computation via processes
A program may not run very long on the processor before being interrupted by the network adaptor.
If application programmers had to deal with interrupts, a working 100-line program would be a mir-
acle. Thus operating systems provide programmers with the abstraction of uninterrupted, sequential
computation under the name of a process.
    The process abstraction is realized by three mechanisms: context switching, scheduling, and protec-
tion, the first two of which are depicted in Fig. 2.11. In Fig. 2.11, Process P1 has the illusion that it runs
on the processor by itself. In reality, as shown on the timeline below, Process P1 may be interrupted by a
timer interrupt, which causes the OS scheduler program to run on the processor. Displacing P1 requires
the operating system to save the state of P1 in memory. The scheduler may run briefly and decide to give
Process P2 a turn. Restoring P2 to run on the processor requires restoring the state of P2 from memory.
Thus the actual time line of a processor may involve frequent context switches between processes, as
orchestrated by the scheduler. Finally, protection ensures that incorrect or malicious behavior of one
process cannot affect other processes.
    As agents of computation, “processes” come in three flavors—interrupt handlers, threads, and user
processes—ranked in order of increasing generality and cost. Interrupt handlers are small pieces of
                                                                           2.4 Operating systems                  41




FIGURE 2.12
The processing of a received Internet packet in BSD is divided between the network adaptor, the kernel, and the
destined process.


computation used to service urgent requests, such as the arrival of a message to the network adaptor;
interrupt handlers use only a small amount of state, typically a few registers. User processes use the
complete state of the machine, such as memory as well as registers; thus, it is expensive to switch
between user processes as directed by the scheduler. Within the context of a single process, threads offer
a cheaper alternative to processes. A thread is a lightweight process that requires less state, because
threads within the same process share the same memory (i.e., same variables). Thus context switching
between two threads in the same process is cheaper than switching processes, because memory does
not have to be remapped. The following example shows the relevance of these concepts to endnode
networking.
Example 8. Receiver Livelock in BSD Unix: In BSD UNIX, as shown in Fig. 2.12, the arrival of a
packet generates an interrupt. The interrupt is a hardware signal that causes the processor to save the
state of the currently running process, say, a Java program. The processor then jumps to the interrupt
handler code, bypassing the scheduler for speed. The interrupt handler copies the packet to a kernel
queue of IP packets waiting to be consumed, makes a request for an operating system thread (called a
software interrupt), and exits. Assuming no further interrupts, the interrupt exit passes control to the
scheduler, which is likely to cede the processor to the software interrupt, which has higher priority than
user processes.
    The kernel thread does TCP and IP processing and queues the packet to the appropriate application
queue, called a socket queue (Fig. 2.12). Assume that the application is a browser such as Netscape.
Netscape runs as a process that may have been asleep waiting for data and is now considered for being
run on the processor by the scheduler. After the software interrupt exits and control passes back to the
scheduler, the scheduler may decide to run Netscape in place of the original Java program.
42        Chapter 2 Network implementation models



    Under high network load, the computer can enter what is called receiver livelock (Mogul and Ra-
makrishnan, 1997), in which the computer spends all its time processing incoming packets, only to
discard them later because the applications never run. In our example, if there is a series of back-to-
back packet arrivals, only the highest-priority interrupt handler will run, possibly leaving no time for
the software interrupt and certainly leaving none for the browser process. Thus either the IP or socket
queues will fill up, causing packets to be dropped after resources have been invested in their processing.
Methods to mitigate this effect are described in Chapter 6.
    Notice also that the latency and throughput of network code in an endnode depend on “process”
activation times. For example, current figures for Pentium IV machines show around 2 µsec of interrupt
latency for a null interrupt call, around 10 µsec for a Process Context switch on a Linux machine
with two processes, and much more time for Windows and Solaris on the same machine. These times
may seem small, but recall that 30 minimum-size (40-byte) packets can arrive in 10 µsec on a Gigabit
Ethernet link.



2.4.2 Infinite memory via virtual memory
In virtual memory (Fig. 2.13), the programmer works with an abstraction of memory that is a linear
array into which a compiler assigns variable locations. Variable X could be stored in location 1010 in
this imaginary (or virtual) array. The virtual memory abstraction is implemented using the twin mech-




FIGURE 2.13
The programmer sees the illusion of contiguous virtual memory, which is, in reality, mapped to a collection of main
memory and disk memory pages via page tables.
                                                                    2.4 Operating systems             43



anisms of page table mapping and demand paging. Both these mechanisms are crucial to understand in
order to optimize data transfer costs in an endnode.
    Any virtual address must be mapped to a physical memory address. The easiest mapping is to use
an offset into physical memory. For example, a virtual array of 15,000 locations could be mapped into
physical memory from, say, 12,000 to 27,000. This has two disadvantages. First, when the program
runs, a block of 15,000 contiguous locations has to be found. Second, the programmer is limited to
using a total memory equal to the size of physical memory.
    Both problems can be avoided by a mapping based on table lookup. Since it takes too much memory
to implement a mapping from any virtual location to any physical location, a more restricted mapping
based on pages is used. Thus for any virtual address, let us say that the high-order bits (e.g., 20 bits)
form the page number and that the low-order bits (e.g., 12 bits) form the location within a page. All
locations within a virtual page are mapped to the same relative location, but individual virtual pages
can be mapped to arbitrary locations. Main memory is also divided into physical pages, such that every
group of 212 memory words is a physical page.
    To map a virtual into a physical address, the corresponding virtual page (i.e., high-order 20 bits) is
mapped to a physical page number while retaining the same location within the page. The mapping is
done by looking up a page table indexed by the virtual page number. A virtual page can be located on
any physical memory page. More generally, some pages (e.g., Virtual Page 2 in Fig. 2.13) may not be
memory resident and can be marked as being on disk. When such a page is accessed, the hardware will
generate an exception and cause the operating system to read the page from the disk page into a main
memory page. This second mechanism is called demand paging.
    Together, page mapping and demand paging solve the two problems of storage allocation and
bounded memory allocations. Instead of solving the harder variable size storage allocation problem,
the OS needs only to keep a list of fixed size free pages and to assign some free pages to a new pro-
gram. Also, the programmer can work with an abstraction of memory whose size is bounded only by
the size of the disk and the number of instruction address bits.
    The extra mapping can slow down each instruction considerably. A Read to virtual location X may
require two main memory accesses: a page table access to translate X to physical address P , followed
by a Read to address P . Modern processors get around this overhead by caching the most recently used
mappings between virtual and physical addresses in a translation look-aside buffer (TLB), which is
a processor-resident cache. The actual translation is done by a piece of hardware called the memory
management unit (MMU), as shown in Fig. 2.8.
    The page table mapping also provides a mechanism for protection between processes. When a
process makes a Read to virtual location X, unless there is a corresponding entry in the page table, the
hardware will generate a page fault exception. By ensuring that only the operating system can change
page table entries, the operating system can ensure that one process cannot read from or write to the
memory of another process in an unauthorized fashion.
    While router forwarding works directly on physical memory, all endnode and server networking
code works on virtual memory. While virtual memory is a potential cost (e.g., for TLB misses), it
also reflects a possible opportunity. For example, it offers the potential for packet copying between the
operating system and the application (see Example 8) to be done more efficiently by manipulating page
tables. This idea is explored further in Chapter 5.
44        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.14
The programmer sees devices as disparate as a disk and a network adaptor as pieces of memory that can be read and
written using system calls, but in reality, the kernel manages a host of device-specific details.



2.4.3 Simple I/O via system calls
Having an application programmer be aware of the variety and complexity of each I/O device would
be intolerable. Thus operating systems provide the programmer with the abstraction of the devices as a
piece of memory (Fig. 2.14) that can be read and written.
     The code that maps from a simple I/O interface call to the actual physical Read (with all parameters
filled in) to the device is called a device driver. If abstraction were the only concern, the device driver
code could be installed in a library of commonly available code that can be “checked out” by each
application. However, since devices such as disks must be shared by all applications, if applications
directly control the disk, an erroneous process could crash the disk. Instead, secure operating system
design requires that only the buggy application fail.
     Thus it makes sense for the I/O calls to be handled by device drivers that are in a secure portion of
the operating system that cannot be affected by buggy processes. This secure portion, called the kernel,
provides a core of essential services, including I/O and page table updates, that applications cannot be
trusted to perform directly.
     Thus when a browser such as Netscape wants to make a disk access to read a Web page, it must make
a so-called system call across the application–kernel boundary. System calls are a protected form of a
function call. The hardware instruction is said to “trap” to a more privileged level (kernel mode), which
allows access to operating system internals. When the function call returns after the I/O completes, the
application code runs at normal privilege levels. A system call is more expensive than a function call
because of the hardware privilege escalation and the extra sanitizing checks for incorrect parameter
values. A simple system call may take a few microseconds on modern machines.
     The relevance to networking is that when a browser wishes to send a message over the network (e.g.,
Process 2 in Fig. 2.14), it must do a system call to activate TCP processing. A few microseconds for
a system call may seem small, but it is really very high overhead on a fast Pentium. Can applications
speed up networking by bypassing the system call? If so, does OS protection get tossed out of the
window? Answers to these tantalizing questions are postponed to Chapter 6.
                                                                                   2.6 Exercises               45




2.5 Summary
This chapter is best sampled based on the reader’s needs. Structurally, the chapter works its way through
four abstraction levels that affect performance: hardware, architecture, operating systems, and proto-
cols. Viewing across abstraction levels is helpful because packet-processing speeds can be limited by
transistor paths implementing packet processing, by architectural limits such as bus speeds, by OS ab-
straction overheads such as system calls, and finally, even by protocol mechanisms. Several examples,
which look ahead to the rest of the book, were described to show that performance can be improved by
understanding each abstraction level.
    Designers that consider all four abstraction levels for each problem will soon be lost in detail.
However, there are a few important performance issues and major architectural decisions for which
simultaneous understanding of all abstraction levels is essential. For example, the simple models given
in this chapter can allow circuit designers, logic designers, architects, microcoders, and software pro-
tocol implementors to work together to craft the architecture of a world-class router. They can also
allow operating system designers, algorithm experts, and application writers to work together to design
a world-class Web server. As link speeds cross 40 Gbps, such interdisciplinary teams will become even
more important. This need is alluded to by Raymond Kurzweil in a different context (Kurzweil, 2001):
   There’s another aspect of creativity. We’ve been talking about great individual contributors, but when
   you’re creating technology it’s necessarily a group process, because technology today is so complex
   that it has to be interdisciplinary . . . And they’re all essentially speaking their own languages, even
   about the same concepts. So we will spend months establishing our common language . . . I have a
   technique to get people to think outside the box: I’ll give a signal-processing problem to the linguists,
   and vice versa, and let them apply the disciplines in which they’ve grown up to a completely different
   problem. The result is often an approach that the experts in the original field would never have thought
   of. Group process gives creativity a new dimension.
   With fields like hardware implementation and protocol design replacing signal processing and lin-
guistics, Kurzweil’s manifesto reflects the goal of this chapter.



2.6 Exercises
1. TCP Protocols and Denial-of-Service Attacks: A common exploit for a hacker is to attempt to
   bring down a popular service, such as Yahoo, by doing a denial-of-service (DOS) attack. A simple
   DOS attack that can be understood using the simple TCP model of Fig. A.1 is TCP Syn-Flooding.
   In this attack, the hacker sends a number of SYN packets to the chosen destination D (e.g., Yahoo)
   using randomly chosen source addresses. D sends back a SYN-ACK to the supposed source S
   and waits for a response. If S is not an active IP address, then there will be no response from S.
   Unfortunately, state for S is kept in a pending connection queue at D until D finally times out S. By
   periodically sending bogus connection attempts pretending to be from different sources, the attacker
   can ensure that the finite pending connection queue is always full. Thereafter, legitimate connection
   requests to D will be denied.
   • Assume there is a monitor that is watching all traffic. What algorithm can be used to detect
     denial-of-service attacks? Try to make your algorithm as fast and memory-efficient as possible
46        Chapter 2 Network implementation models



     so that it can potentially be used in real-time, even in a router. This is a hard problem, but even
     starting to think about the problem is instructive.
   • Suppose the monitor realizes a TCP flood attack is underway. Why might it be hard to distinguish
     between legitimate traffic and flood traffic?
2. Digital Design: Multiplexers and barrel shifters are very useful in networking hardware, so working
   on this problem can help even a software person to build up hardware intuition.
   • First, design a 2-input multiplexer from basic gates (AND, OR, NOT).
   • Next, generalize the idea shown in the chapter to design an N -input multiplexer from N/2 input
     multiplexers. Use this to describe a design that takes log N gate delays and O(N ) transistors.
   • Show how to design a barrel shifter using a reduction to multiplexers (i.e., use as many muxes as
     you need in your solution). Based on your earlier solutions, what are the gate and time complex-
     ities of your solution?
   • Try to design a barrel shifter directly at the transistor level. What are its time and transistor
     complexities? You can do better using direct design than the simple reduction earlier.
3. Thermometer Encoding: Spell out the digital logic of the following 4-bit-input digital-to-analog
   converter (a.k.a. thermometer encoding), a wider slight variant of which is used in Fig. 2.4 for
   generating an N -bit mask. The inputs are i1 (the least significant bit), i2 , i3 , and i4 . The outputs are
   j1 , j2 , · · · , j15 . If the binary number (i4 i3 i2 i1 )2 has value k, then j1 = j2 = · · · = jk = 1 and the rest
   is 0. You need to spell out the formula for each jl (1 ≤ l ≤ 15) as a logic function of the inputs.
   Please use notations ∨ (for OR), ∧ (for AND), and ¬ (for NOT).
4. Memory Design: For the design of the pipelined flow ID lookup scheme described earlier, draw the
   timing diagrams for the pipelined lookups. Use the numbers described in the chapter, and clearly
   sketch a sample binary tree with 15 leaves and show how it can be looked up after four lookups on
   four different banks. Assume a binary tree, not a ternary tree. Also, calculate the number of keys that
   can be supported using 16 banks of RAMBUS if the first k levels of the tree are cached in on-chip
   SRAM.
5. Memories and Pipelining Trees: This problem studies how to pipeline a heap. A heap is important
   for applications like QoS, where a router wishes to transmit the packet with the earliest timestamp
   first. Thus it makes sense to have a heap ordered on timestamps. To make it efficient, the heap needs
   to be pipelined in the same fashion as the binary search tree example in the chapter, though doing so
   for a heap is somewhat harder. Fig. 2.15 shows an example of a P-heap capable of storing 15 keys.
   A P-heap (Bhagwan and Lin, 2000) is a full binary tree, such as a standard heap, except that nodes
   anywhere in the heap can be empty as long as all children of the node are also empty (e.g., nodes 6,
   12, 13).
       For the following explanations consult Fig. 2.15 and Fig. 2.16. Consider adding key 9 to the heap.
   Assume every node N has a count of the number of empty nodes in the subtree rooted at N . Since
   9 is less than the root value of 16, 9 must move below. Since both the left and right children have
   empty nodes in their subtrees, we arbitrarily choose to add 9 to the left subtree (node 2). The index,
   value, and position values shown on the left of each tree are registers used to show the state of the
   current operation. Thus in Fig. 2.15, part (b), when 9 is added to the left subtree, the index represents
   the depth of the subtree (depth 2) and the position is the number of the node (i.e., node 2) that the
   value 9 is being added to.
                                                                                       2.6 Exercises            47




FIGURE 2.15
An enqueue example in five snapshots to be read from left to right and then top-down. In each snapshot, the index
represents the depth of the subtree, and the position is the number of the node that the value is being added to.



      Next, since 9 is less than 14 and since only the right child has space in its subtree, 9 is added to
   the subtree rooted at node 5. This time 9 is greater than 7, so 7 is replaced with 9 (in node 5) and 7 is
   pushed down to the empty node, 10. Thus in Fig. 2.15, part (d), the index value is 4 (i.e., operation is
   at depth 4) and the position is 10. Although in Fig. 2.15 only one of the registers at any index/depth
   has nonempty information, keeping separate registers for each index will allow pipelining.
      Consider next what is involved in removing the largest element (dequeue). Remove 16 and try to
   push down the hole created until an empty subtree is created. Thus in Step 3, the hole is moved to
   node 2 (because its value, 14, is larger than its sibling, with value 10), then to node 4, and finally to
48      Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.16
Dequeue example.


   node 9. Each time a hole is moved down, the corresponding nonempty value from below replaces
   the old hole.
   • In order to make the enqueue operation work correctly, the count of empty subtree nodes must be
     maintained. Explain briefly how the count should be maintained for each enqueue and dequeue
     operation (the structure will be pipelined in a moment, so make sure the count values respect this
     goal).
   • A logical thing to do is to pipeline by level, as we did for the binary tree in the chapter. However,
     here we have a problem. At each level (say, inserting 9 at the root), the operation has to consult
     the two children at the next level as well. Thus when the first operation moves down to level 2,
                                                                               2.6 Exercises          49



       one cannot bring in a second operation to level 1 or there will be memory contention. Clearly,
       waiting till one operation finishes completely will work, but this reduces to sequential processing
       of operations. What is the fastest rate you can pipeline the heap?
   •   Consider the operations “Enqueue 9; Enqueue 4.5; Dequeue” pipelined as you have answered
       earlier. Show six consecutive snapshots of the tree supporting these three operations.
   •   Assume that each level memory is an on-chip SRAM that takes 5 nsec for a memory access.
       Assume that you can read and write the value and count fields together in one access. Remember
       that some of the memories can be queried in parallel. What is the steady-state throughput of the
       heap, in operations per second?
   •   Could one improve the number of memory references by using a wider memory access and laying
       out the tree appropriately?
   •   Before this design, previous designs used a memory element for each heap element as well as
       logic for each element. Thus the amount of logic required scaled directly with heap size, which
       scales poorly in terms of density and power. In this design, the memory scales with the number
       of heap elements and thus scales with SRAM densities and power, but the logic required scales
       much better. Explain.
6. Architecture, Caches, and Fast Hash Functions: The L1 cache in a CPU provides essentially
   a fast hash function that maps from a physical memory address to its contents via the L1 cache.
   Suppose that one wants to teach an old dog (the L1 cache) a new trick (to do IP lookups) using a
   method suggested in Chiueh and Pradhan (1999). The goal is to use the L1 cache as a hash table to
   map 32-bit IP addresses to 7-bit port numbers. Assume a 16-KB L1 cache, of which the first 4 KB
   are reserved for the hash table, and a 32-byte cache block size. Assume a byte-addressable machine,
   a 32-bit virtual address, and a page size of 4 KB. Thus there are 512 32-byte blocks in the cache.
   Assume the L1 cache is directly indexed (called direct mapped). Thus bits 5 through 13 of a virtual
   address are used to index into one of 512 blocks, with bits 0 through 4 identifying the byte within
   each block.
   • Given pages of size 4 KB and that the machine is byte addressable, how many bits in a virtual
     address identify the virtual page? How many bits of the virtual page number intersect with bits 5
     through 13 used to index into the L1 cache?
   • The only way to ensure that the hash table is not thrown out of the L1 cache when some other
     virtual pages arrive is to mark any pages that could map into the same portion of the L1 cache
     as uncacheable at start-up (this can be done). Based on your previous answer and the fact that
     the hash table uses the first 4 KB of L1 cache, precisely identify which pages must be marked as
     uncacheable.
   • To do a lookup of a 32-bit IP address, first convert the address to a virtual address by setting to
     0 all bits except bits 5 through 11 (bits 12 and 13 are zero because only the top quarter of the
     L1 cache is being used). Assume this is translated to the exact same physical address. When a
     Read is done to this address, the L1 cache hardware will return the contents of the first 32-bit
     word of the corresponding cache block. Each 32-bit word will contain a 25-bit tag and a 7-bit
     port number. Next, compare all bits in the IP address, other than bits 5 through 11, with the tag,
     and keep doing so for each 32-bit entry in the block. How many L1 cache accesses are required
     in the worst case for a hash lookup? Why might this be faster than a standard hash lookup in
     software?
50      Chapter 2 Network implementation models



7. Operating Systems and Lazy Receiver Processing: Example 8 described how BSD protocol pro-
   cessing can lead to receiver livelock. Lazy receiver processing (Druschel and Banga, 1996) combats
   this problem via two mechanisms.
   • The first mechanism is to replace the single shared IP processing queue by a separate queue per
     destination socket. Why does this help? Why might this not be easy to implement?
   • The second mechanism is to implement the protocol processing at the priority of the receiving
     process and as part of the context of the received process (and not a separate software interrupt).
     Why does this help? Why might this not be easy to implement?
                                                                                                          CHAPTER


Fifteen implementation principles
                                                                                                              3
                        Instead of computing, I had to think about the problem, a formula for success that I recommend
                                                                                                                 highly.
                                                                                                     —Ivan Sutherland


After understanding how queens and knights move in a game of chess, it helps to understand basic
strategies, such as castling and the promotion of pawns in the endgame. Similarly, having studied some
of the rules of the protocol implementation game in the last chapter, you will be presented in this chapter
with implementation strategies in the form of 15 principles. The principles are abstracted from protocol
implementations that have worked well. Many good implementors unconsciously use such principles.
The point, however, is to articulate such principles so that they can be deliberately applied to craft
efficient implementations.
    This chapter is organized as follows. Section 3.1 motivates the use of the principles using a ternary
CAM problem. Section 3.2 clarifies the distinction between algorithms and algorithmics using a net-
work security forensics problem. Section 3.3 introduces 15 implementation principles; Section 3.4
explains the differences between implementation and design principles. Finally, Section 3.5 describes
some cautionary questions that should be asked before applying the principles.

    Quick reference guide
    The reader pressed for time should consult the summaries of the 15 principles found in Figs. 3.1–3.3. Two networking
    applications of these principles can be found in a ternary CAM update problem (Section 3.1) and a network security
    forensics problem (Section 3.2).




3.1 Motivating the use of principles—updating ternary
    content-addressable memories
Call a string ternary if it contains characters that are either 0, 1, or *, where * denotes a wildcard that
can match both a 0 and a 1. Examples of ternary strings of length 3 include S1 = 01* and S2 = *1*;
the actual binary string 011 matches both S1 and S2, while 111 matches only S2. A ternary content-
addressable memory (CAM) is a memory containing ternary strings of a specified length together with
associated information; when presented with an input string, the CAM will search all its memory loca-
tions in parallel to output (in one cycle) the lowest memory location whose ternary string matches the
specified input key.
Network Algorithmics. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-809927-8.00008-7
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                                       51
52       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles




FIGURE 3.1
Summary of Principles 1–5—systems thinking.




FIGURE 3.2
Summary of Principles 6–10—recovering efficiency while retaining modularity.



   Fig. 3.4 shows an application of ternary CAMs to the longest-matching prefix problem for Internet
routers. For every incoming packet, each Internet router must extract a 32-bit destination IP address
from the incoming packet and match it against a forwarding database of IP prefixes with their corre-
sponding next hops. An IP prefix is a ternary string of length 32 where all the wildcards are at the end.
We will change notation slightly and let * denote any number of wildcard characters, so 101* matches
10100 and not just 1010.
                                                        3.1 Motivating the use of principles        53




FIGURE 3.3
Summary of Principles 11–15—speeding up key routines.




FIGURE 3.4
Example of using a ternary CAM for prefix lookups.


    Thus in Fig. 3.4 a packet sent to a destination address that starts with 010001 matches the prefixes
010001* and 01* but should be sent to Port P5 because Internet forwarding requires that packets be
forwarded using the longest match. We will have more to say about this problem in Chapter 11. For now,
note that if the prefixes are arranged in a ternary CAM such that all longer prefixes occur before any
shorter prefixes (as in Fig. 3.4), the ternary CAM provides the matching next hop in one memory cycle.
    While ternary CAMs are extremely fast for message forwarding, they require that longer prefixes
occur before shorter prefixes. But routing protocols often add or delete prefixes. Suppose in Fig. 3.4
that a new prefix, 11*, with next hop Port 1 must be added to the router database. The naive way to do
insertion would make space in the group of length-2 prefixes (i.e., create a hole before 0*) by pushing
up by one position all prefixes of length 2 or higher.
    Unfortunately, for a large database of around 100,000 prefixes kept by a typical core router, this
would take 100,000 memory cycles, which would make it very slow to add a prefix. We can obtain a
54        Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles




FIGURE 3.5
Finding a spot for the new prefix by moving X to Y ’s position recursively requires us to find a spot to move Y .



better solution systematically by applying the following two principles (described later in this chapter
as principles P13 and P15).

Understand and exploit degrees of freedom
In looking at the forwarding table on the left of Fig. 3.4 we see that all prefixes of the same length are
arranged together and all prefixes of length i occur after all prefixes of length j > i. However, in the
figure all prefixes of the same length are also sorted by value. Thus 00* occurs before 01*, which occurs
before 10*. But it is unnecessary for the CAM to correctly return longest matching prefixes: We only
require ordering between prefixes of different lengths; we do not require ordering between prefixes of
the same length.
    In looking at the more abstract view of Fig. 3.4 shown in Fig. 3.5, we see that if we are to add an
entry to the start of the set of length-i prefixes, we have to create a hole at the end of the length-(i + 1)
set of prefixes. Thus we have to move the entry X, already at this position, to another position. If we
move X one step up, we will be forced into our prior inefficient solution.
    However, our observation about degrees of freedom says that we can place X anywhere adjacent to
the other length-(i + 1) prefixes. Thus, an alternative idea is to move X to the position held by Y , the
last length-(i + 2) prefix. But this forces us to find a new position for Y . How does this help? We need
a second principle.

Use algorithmic techniques
Again, recursion suggests itself: We solve a problem by reducing the problem to a “smaller” instance
of the same problem. In this case, the new problem of assigning Y a new position is “smaller” because
the set of length-(i + 2) prefixes is closer to the free space at the top of the CAM than the set of length-
(i + 1) prefixes. Thus we move Y to the end of the length-(i + 3) set of prefixes, etc.
    While recursion is a natural way to think, a better implementation is to unwind the recursion by
starting from the top of the CAM and working downward by creating a hole at the end of the length-1
                                                                  3.2 Algorithms versus algorithmics                          55



prefixes,1 creating a hole at the end of the length-2 prefixes, etc., until we create a hole at the end of the
length-i prefixes. Thus the worst-case time is 32 − i memory accesses, which is around 32 for small i.
    Are we done? No, we can do better by further exploiting degrees of freedom. First, in Fig. 3.5 we
assumed that the free space was at the top of the CAM. But the free space could be placed anywhere. In
particular, it can be placed after the length-16 prefixes. This reduces the worst-case number of memory
accesses by a factor of 2 (Shah and Gupta, 2001).
    A more sophisticated degree of freedom is as follows. So far, the specification of the CAM insertion
algorithm required that “a prefix of length i must occur before a prefix of length j if i > j .” Such
a specification is sufficient for correctness but is not necessary. For example, 010* can occur before
111001* because there is no address that can match both prefixes!
    Thus a less exacting specification is “if two prefixes P and Q can match the same address, then P
must come before Q in the CAM if P is longer than Q.” This is used in Shah and Gupta (2001) to
further reduce the worst-case number of memory accesses for insertion for some practical databases.
    While the last improvement is not worth its complexity, it points to another important principle. We
often divide a large problem into subproblems and hand over the subproblem for a solution based on a
specification. For example, the CAM hardware designer may have handed over the update problem to
a microcoder, specifying that longer prefixes be placed before shorter ones.
    But, as before, such a specification may not be the only way to solve the original problem. Thus
changes to the specification (principle P3) can yield a more efficient solution. Of course, this requires
curious and confident individuals who understand the big picture or who are brave enough to ask dan-
gerous questions.



3.2 Algorithms versus algorithmics
It may be possible to argue that the previous example is still essentially algorithmic and does not
require system thinking. One more quick example will help clarify the difference between algorithms
and algorithmics.

Security forensics problem
In many intrusion detection systems, a manager often finds that a flow (defined by some packet header,
for example, a source IP address) is likely to be misbehaving based on some probabilistic check. For
example, a source doing a port scan may be identified after it has sent 100,000 packets to different
machines in the attacked subnet.
    While there are methods to identify such sources, one problem is that the evidence (the 100,000
packets sent by the source) has typically disappeared (i.e., been forwarded from the router) by the time
the guilty source is identified. The problem is that the probabilistic check requires accumulating some
state (in, say, a suspicion table) for every packet received over some period of time before a source can
be deemed suspicious. Thus if a source is judged to be suspicious after 10 seconds, how can one go
back in time and retrieve the packets sent by the source during those 10 seconds?


1 For simplicity, this description has assumed that the CAM contains prefixes of all lengths; it is easy to modify the algorithm to
avoid this assumption.
56        Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles




FIGURE 3.6
Keeping a queue of the last 100,000 packets that contains forensic information about what suspicious flows have
been sent in the past.


    To accomplish this, in Fig. 3.6 we keep a queue of the last 100,000 packets that were sent by the
router. When a packet is forwarded, we also add a copy of the packet (or just keep a pointer to the
packet) to the head of the queue. To keep the queue bounded, when the queue is full, we delete from
the tail as well.
    The main difficulty with this scheme is that when a guilty flow is detected, there may be lots of
the flow’s packets in the queue (Fig. 3.6). All of these packets must be placed in the forensic log for
transmission to a manager. The naive method of searching through a large DRAM buffer is very slow.
    The textbook algorithms approach would be to add some index structure to search quickly for flow
IDs. For example, one might maintain a hash table of flow IDs that maps every flow to a list of pointers
to all packets with that flow ID in the queue. When a new packet is placed in the queue, the flow ID is
looked up in the hash table and the address of the new packet in the queue is placed at the end of the
flow’s list. Of course, when packets leave the queue, their entries must be removed from the list, and
the list can be long. Fortunately, the entry to be deleted is guaranteed to be at the head of the queue for
that flow ID.
    Despite this, the textbook scheme has some difficulties. It adds more space to maintain these extra
queues per flow ID, and space can be at a premium for a high-speed implementation. It also adds some
extra complexity to packet processing to maintain the hash table and requires reading out all of a flow’s
packets to the forensic log before the packet is overwritten by a packet that arrives 100,000 packets
later. Instead, the following “systems” solution may be more elegant.

Solution
Do not attempt to immediately identify all of a flow F ’s packets when F is identified, but lazily identify
them as they reach the end of the packet queue. This is shown in Fig. 3.7. When we add a packet to the
head of the queue, we must remove a packet from the end of the queue (at least when the queue is full).
             3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description                                 57




FIGURE 3.7
Keeping a queue of the last 100,000 packets that contains forensic information about what suspicious flows have
been sent in the past.



    If that packet (say, Q, see Fig. 3.6) belongs to flow F that is in the Suspicion Table and flow F has
reached some threshold of suspicion, we then add packet Q to the forensic log. The log can be sent
to a manager. The overhead of this scheme is significant but manageable; we have to do two packet-
processing steps, one for the packet being forwarded and one for the packet being removed from the
queue. But these two packet-processing steps are also required in the textbook scheme; on the other
hand, the elegant scheme requires no hashing and uses much less storage (no pointers between the
100,000 packets).



3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description
The two earlier examples and the warm-up exercise in Chapter 1 motivate the following 15 principles,
which are used in the rest of the book. They are summarized inside the front cover. To add more
structure, they are categorized as follows:
• Systems Principles: Principles 1–5 take advantage of the fact that a system is constructed from
  subsystems. By taking a systemwide rather than a black-box approach, one can often improve per-
  formance.
• Improving Efficiency While Retaining Modularity: Principles 6–10 suggest methods for improv-
  ing performance while allowing complex systems to be built modularly.
• Speeding It Up: Principles 11–15 suggest techniques for speeding up a key routine considered by
  itself.
58       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



    Amazingly, many of these principles have been used for years by Chef Charlie at his Greasy Spoon
restaurant. This chapter sometimes uses illustrations drawn from Chef Charlie’s experience, in addition
to computer systems examples. One networking example is also described for each principle, though
details are deferred to later chapters.


3.3.1 Systems principles
The first five principles exploit the fact that we are building systems.

P1: Avoid obvious waste in common situations
In a system, there may be wasted resources in special sequences of operations. If these patterns occur
commonly, it may be worth eliminating the waste. This reflects an attitude of thriftiness toward system
costs.
    For example, Chef Charlie has to make a trip to the pantry to get the ice cream maker to make ice
cream and to the pantry for a pie plate when he makes pies. But when he makes pie à la mode, he has
learned to eliminate the obvious waste of two separate trips to the pantry.
    Similarly, optimizing compilers look for obvious waste in terms of repeated subexpressions. For
example, if a statement calculates i = 5.1 ∗ n + 2 and a later statement calculates j := (5.1 ∗ n + 2) ∗ 4,
the calculation of the common subexpression 5.1 ∗ n + 2 is wasteful and can be avoided by computing
the subexpression once, assigning it to a temporary variable t, and then calculating i := t and j := t ∗ 4.
A classic networking example, described in Chapter 5, is avoiding making multiple copies of a packet
between the operating system and user buffers.
    Notice that each operation (e.g., walk to pantry, line of code, single packet copy) considered by
itself has no obvious waste. It is the sequence of operations (two trips to the pantry, two statements
that recompute a subexpression, two copies) that have obvious waste. Clearly, the larger the exposed
context, the greater the scope for optimization. While the identification of certain operation patterns as
being worth optimizing is often a matter of designer intuition, optimizations can be tested in practice
using benchmarks.

P2: Shift computation in time
Systems have an aspect in space and time. The space aspect is represented by the subsystems, possibly
geographically distributed, into which the system is decomposed. The time aspect is represented by
the fact that a system is instantiated at various time scales, from fabrication time to compile time to
parameter-setting times to run time. Many efficiencies can be gained by shifting computation in time.
Here are three generic methods that fall under time-shifting.
• P2a: Precompute. This refers to computing quantities before they are actually used, to save time at
  the point of use. For example, Chef Charlie prepares crushed garlic in advance to save time during
  the dinner rush. A common systems example is table-lookup methods, where the computation of an
  expensive function f in run time is replaced by the lookup of a table that contains the value of f
  for every element in the domain of f . A networking example is the precomputation of IP and TCP
  headers for packets in a connection; because only a few header fields change for each packet, this
  reduces the work to write packet headers (Chapter 9).
• P2b: Evaluate Lazily. This refers to postponing expensive operations at critical times, hoping that
  either the operation will not be needed later or a less busy time will be found to perform the opera-
             3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description                               59




FIGURE 3.8
Easing the implementation of Subsystem 1 by weakening its specification from S to, say, W , at the cost of making
Subsystem 2 do more work.


  tion. For example, Chef Charlie postpones dishwashing to the end of the day. While precomputation
  is computing before the need, lazy evaluation is computing only when needed.
  A famous example of lazy evaluation in systems is copy-on-write in the Mach operating system. Sup-
  pose we have to copy a virtual address space A to another space, B, for process migration. A general
  solution is to copy all pages in A to B to allow for pages in B to be written independently. Instead,
  copy-on-write makes page table entries in B’s virtual address space point to the corresponding page
  in A. When a process using B writes to a location, then a separate copy of the corresponding page in
  A is made for B, and the write is performed. Since we expect the number of pages that are written
  in B to be small compared to the total number of pages, this avoids unnecessary copying.
  A simple networking example occurs when a network packet arrives at an endnode X in a different
  byte order than X’s native byte order. Rather than swap all bytes immediately, it can be more efficient
  to wait to swap the bytes that are actually read.
• P2c: Share Expenses. This refers to taking advantage of expensive operations done by other parts
  of the system. An important example of expense sharing is batching, where several expensive op-
  erations can be done together more cheaply than doing each separately. For example, Charlie bakes
  several pies in one batch. Computer systems have used batch processing for years, especially in the
  early days of mainframes, before time sharing. Batching trades latency for throughput. A simple
  networking example of expense sharing is timing wheels (Chapter 7), where the timer data structure
  shares expensive per-clock-tick processing with the routine that updates the time-of-day clock.

P3: Relax system requirements
When a system is first designed top-down, functions are partitioned among subsystems. After fixing
subsystem requirements and interfaces, individual subsystems are designed. When implementation dif-
ficulties arise, the basic system structure may have to be redone, as shown in Fig. 3.8.
    As shown in Chapter 1, implementation difficulties (e.g., implementing a divide) can sometimes be
solved by relaxing the specification requirements for, say, Subsystem 1. This is shown in the figure by
weakening the specification of Subsystem 1 from, say, S to W , but at the cost of making Subsystem 2
obey a stronger property, Q, compared to the previous property, P .
    Three techniques that arise from this principle are distinguished by how they relax the original
subsystem specification.
60        Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



• P3a: Trade Certainty for Time. Systems designers can fool themselves into believing that their
  systems offer deterministic guarantees, when in fact we all depend on probabilities. For example,
  quantum mechanics tells us there is some probability that the atoms in your body will rearrange
  themselves to form a hockey puck, but this is clearly improbable.2 This opens the door to consider
  randomized strategies when deterministic algorithms are too slow.
  In systems, randomization is used by millions of Ethernets worldwide to sort out packet-sending
  instants after collisions occur. A simple networking example of randomization is Cisco’s NetFlow
  traffic measurement software: If a router does not have enough processing power to count all arriving
  packets, it can count random samples and still be able to statistically identify large flows. A second
  networking example is stochastic fair queuing (Chapter 14), where, rather than keep track exactly
  of the networking conversations going through a router, conversations are tracked probabilistically
  using hashing.
• P3b: Trade Accuracy for Time. Similarly, numerical analysis cures us of the illusion that comput-
  ers are perfectly accurate. Thus it can pay to relax accuracy requirements for speed. In systems,
  many image compression techniques, such as MPEG, rely on lossy compression using interpolation.
  Chapter 1 used approximate thresholds to replace divides by shifts. In networking, some packet-
  scheduling algorithms at routers (Chapter 14) require sorting packets by their departure deadlines;
  some proposals to reduce sorting overhead at high speeds suggest approximate sorting, which can
  slightly reduce quality-of-service bounds but reduce processing.
• P3c: Shift Computation in Space. Notice that all the examples given for this principle relaxed re-
  quirements: Sampling may miss some packets, and the transferred image may not be identical to the
  original image. However, other parts of the system (e.g., Subsystem 2 in Fig. 3.8) have to adapt to
  these looser requirements. Thus we prefer to call the general idea of moving computation from one
  subsystem to another (“robbing Peter to pay Paul”) shifting computation in space. In networking, for
  example, the need for routers to fragment packets has recently been avoided by having end systems
  calculate a packet size that will pass all routers.

P4: Leverage off system components
A black-box view of system design is to decompose the system into subsystems and then to design
each subsystem in isolation. While this top-down approach has a pleasing modularity, in practice
performance-critical components are often constructed partially bottom-up. For example, algorithms
are designed to fit the features offered by the hardware. Here are some techniques that fall under this
principle.
• P4a: Exploit Locality. Chapter 2 showed that memory hardware offers efficiencies if related data
  is laid out contiguously, e.g., same sector for disks, or same DRAM page for DRAMs. Disk-search
  algorithms exploit this fact by using search trees of high radix, such as B-trees. IP-lookup algorithms
  (Chapter 11) use the same trick to reduce lookup times by placing several keys in a wide word, as
  did the example in Chapter 1.
• P4b: Trade Memory for Speed. The obvious technique is to use more memory, such as lookup tables,
  to save processing time. A less obvious technique is to compress a data structure to make it more
  likely to fit into cache, because cache accesses are cheaper than memory accesses; in this case,


2 Quote due to Tony Lauck.
              3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description                                            61



  both memory and speed may be improved. The Lulea IP-lookup algorithm described in Chapter 11
  uses this idea by using sparse arrays that can still be looked up efficiently using space-efficient
  bitmaps.
• P4c: Exploit Hardware Features. Compilers use strength reduction to optimize away multipli-
  cations in loops; for example, in a loop where addresses are 4 bytes and the index i increases
  by 1 each time, instead of computing 4 ∗ i, the compiler calculates the new array index as be-
  ing 4 higher than its previous value. This exploits the fact that multiplies are more expensive
  than additions on many modern processors. Similarly, it pays to manipulate data in multiples of
  the machine word size, as we will see in the fast IP-checksum algorithms described in Chap-
  ter 9.
    If this principle is carried too far, the modularity of the system will be in jeopardy. Two techniques
alleviate this problem. First, if we exploit other system features only to improve performance, then
changes to those system features can only affect performance and not correctness. Second, we use this
technique only for system components that profiling has shown to be a bottleneck.

P5: Add hardware to improve performance
When all else fails, goes the aphorism, use brute force. Adding new hardware,3 such as buying a faster
processor, can be simpler and more cost effective than using clever techniques. Besides the brute-force
approach of using faster infrastructure (e.g., faster processors, memory, buses, links), there are cleverer
hardware–software trade-offs. Since hardware is less flexible and has higher design costs, it pays to add
the minimum amount of hardware needed.
    Thus baking at the Greasy Spoon was sped up using microwave ovens. In computer systems, dra-
matic improvements each year in processor speeds and memory densities suggest doing key algorithms
in software and upgrading to faster processors for speed increases. But computer systems abound with
cleverer hardware–software trade-offs.
    For example, in a multiprocessor system, if a processor wishes to write data, it must inform any
“owners” of cached versions of the data. This interaction can be avoided if each processor has a piece
of hardware that watches the bus for write transactions by other processors and automatically inval-
idates the cached location when necessary. This simple hardware snoopy cache controller allows the
remainder of the cache-consistency algorithm to be efficiently performed in software.
    Decomposing functions between hardware and software is an art in itself. Hardware offers several
benefits. First, there is no time required to fetch instructions: Instructions are effectively hardcoded.
Second, common computational sequences (which would require several instructions in software) can
be done in a single hardware clock cycle. For example, finding the first bit set in, say, a 32-bit word
may take several instructions on a RISC machine but can be computed by a simple priority encoder, as
shown in the previous chapter.
    Third, hardware allows you to explicitly take advantage of parallelism inherent in the problem.
Finally, hardware manufactured in volume may be cheaper than a general-purpose processor. For ex-
ample, a Pentium may cost $100, while an ASIC in volume with similar speeds may cost $10.


3 By contrast, Principle P4 talks about exploiting existing system features, such as the existing hardware. Of course, the distinc-
tion between principles tends to blur and must be taken with a grain of salt.
62       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



    On the other hand, a software design is easily transported to the next generation of faster chips.
Hardware, despite the use of programmable chips, is still less flexible. Despite this, with the advent of
design tools such as VHDL synthesis packages, hardware design times have decreased considerably.
Thus in the last few years chips performing fairly complex functions, such as image compression and
IP lookups, have been designed.
    Besides specific performance improvements, new technology can result in a complete paradigm
shift. A visionary designer may completely redesign a system in anticipation of such trends. For exam-
ple, the invention of the transistor and fast digital memories certainly enabled the use of digitized voice
in the telephone network.
    Increases in chip density have led computer architects to ponder what computational features to add
to memories to alleviate the processor-memory bottleneck. In networks, the availability of high-speed
links in the 1980s led to the use of large addresses and large headers. Ironically, the emergence of
laptops in the 1990s led to the use of low-bandwidth wireless links and to a renewed concern for header
compression. Technology trends can seesaw!
    The following specific hardware techniques are often used in networking ASICs and are worth
mentioning. They were first described in Chapter 2 and are repeated here for convenience.
• P5a: Use Memory Interleaving and Pipelining. Similar techniques are used in IP lookup, in classi-
  fication, and in scheduling algorithms that implement QoS. The multiple banks can be implemented
  using several external memories, a single external memory such as a RAMBUS, or on-chip SRAM
  within a chip that also contains processing logic.
• P5b: Use Wide Word Parallelism. A common theme in many networking designs, such as the
  Lucent bit vector scheme (Chapter 12), is to use wide memory words that can be processed in
  parallel. This can be implemented using DRAM and exploiting page mode or by using SRAM and
  making each memory word wider.
• P5c: Combine DRAM and SRAM. We have explained in Chapter 2 and will explain in Chapter 16
  two clever applications of this principle.


3.3.2 Principles for modularity with efficiency
An engineer who had read Dave Clark’s classic papers (e.g., Clark [1985]) on the inefficiencies of
layered implementations once complained to a researcher about modularity. The researcher (Radia
Perlman) replied, “But that’s how we got to the stage where we could complain about something.” Her
point, of course, was that complex systems like network protocols could only have been engineered
using layering and modularity. The following principles, culled from work by Clark and others, show
how to regain efficiencies while retaining modularity.

P6: Create efficient specialized routines by replacing inefficient general-purpose routines
As in mathematics, the use of abstraction in computer system design can make systems compact, or-
thogonal, and modular. However, at times the one-size-fits-all aspect of a general-purpose routine leads
to inefficiencies. In important cases, it can pay to design an optimized and specialized routine.
    A systems example can be found in database caches. Most general-purpose caching strategies would
replace the least recently used record to disk. However, consider a query-processing routine processing
a sequence of database tuples in a loop. In such a case, it is the most recently used record that will be
used furthest in the future, so it is the ideal candidate for replacement. Thus many database applications
             3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description                                       63



replace the operating system caching routines with more specialized routines. It is best to do such spe-
cialization only for key routines, to avoid code bloat. A networking example is the fast UDP processing
routines that we describe in Chapter 9.

P7: Avoid unnecessary generality
The tendency to design abstract and general subsystems can also lead to unnecessary or rarely used
features. Thus, rather than building several specialized routines (e.g., P6) to replace the general-purpose
routine, we might remove features to gain performance.4
    Of course, as in the case of P3, removing features requires users of the routine to live with re-
strictions. For example, in RISC processors, the elimination of complex instructions such as multiplies
required multiplication to be emulated by firmware. A networking example is provided by Fbufs (Chap-
ter 5), which provides a specialized virtual memory service that allows efficient copying between virtual
address spaces.

P8: Don’t be tied to reference implementations
Specifications are written for clarity, not to suggest efficient implementations. Because abstract speci-
fication languages are unpopular, many specifications use imperative languages such as C. Rather than
precisely describe what function is to be computed, one gets code that prescribes how to compute the
function. This has two side effects.
    First, there is a strong tendency to overspecify. Second, many implementors copy the reference
implementation in the specification, which is a problem when the reference implementation was chosen
for conceptual clarity and not efficiency. As Clark (1985) points out, implementors are free to change
the reference implementation as long as the two implementations have the same external effects. In
fact, there may be other structured implementations that are efficient as well as modular.
    For example, Charlie knows that when a recipe tells him to cut beans and then to cut carrots, he can
interchange the two steps. In the systems world, Clark originally suggested the use of upcalls (Clark,
1985) for operating systems. In an upcall, a lower layer can call an upper layer for data or advice, seem-
ingly violating the rules of hierarchical decomposition introduced in the design of operating systems.
Upcalls are commonly used today in network protocol implementations.

P9: Pass hints in module interfaces
A hint is information passed from a client to a service that, if correct, can avoid expensive computation
by the service. The two key phrases are passed and if correct. By passing the hint in its request, a
service can avoid the need for the associative lookup needed to access a cache. For example, a hint can
be used to supply a direct index into the processing state at the receiver. Also, unlike caches, the hint is
not guaranteed to be correct and hence must be checked against other certifiably correct information.
Hints improve performance if the hint is correct most of the time.
    This definition of a hint suggests a variant in which information is passed that is guaranteed to be
correct and hence requires no checking. For want of an established term, we will call such information
a tip. Tips are harder to use because of the need to ensure the correctness of the tip.


4 Butler Lampson, a computer scientist and Turing Award winner, provides two quotes: When in doubt, get rid of it (anonymous)
and Exterminate Features (Thacker).
