                                                                Organization of the book            xxi



prefix lookups, packet classification, switching, and the implementation of measurement and security
primitives. Chapter 1 goes into more detail about the inherent causes of these bottlenecks.
    The fundamental methods that encompass network algorithmics include implementation models
(Chapter 2) and 15 implementation principles (Chapter 3). The implementation models include models
of operating systems, protocols, hardware, and architecture. They are included because the world of
network protocol implementation requires the skills of several different communities, including operat-
ing system experts, protocol pundits, hardware designers, and computer architects. The implementation
models are an attempt to bridge the gaps between these traditionally separate communities.
    On the other hand, the implementation principles are an attempt to abstract the main ideas behind
many specific implementation techniques. They include such well-known principles as “Optimize the
expected case.” They also include somewhat less well-known principles, such as “Combine DRAM
with SRAM,” which is a surprisingly powerful principle for producing fast hardware designs for net-
work devices.
    While Part 1 of the book lays out the methodology of network algorithmics, Part 2 applies the
methodology to specific network bottlenecks in endnodes and servers. For example, Part 2 discusses
copy avoidance techniques (such as passing virtual memory pointers and RDMA) and efficient control
transfer methods (such as bypassing the kernel, as in the VIA proposal, and techniques for building
event-driven servers).
    Similarly, Part 3 of the book applies the methodology of Part 1 to interconnect devices, such as
network routers. For example, Part 3 discusses efficient prefix-lookup schemes (such as multibit or
compressed tries) and efficient switching schemes (such as those based on virtual output queues and
bipartite matching).
    Finally, Part 4 of the book applies the methodology of Part 1 to new functions for security and mea-
surement that could be housed in either servers or interconnect devices. For example, Part 4 discusses
efficient methods to compress large traffic reports and efficient methods to detect attacks.



Organization of the book
This book is organized into four overall parts. Each part is made as self-contained as possible to al-
low detailed study. Readers that are pressed for time can consult the index or Table of Contents for
a particular topic (e.g., IP lookups). More importantly, the opening section of each chapter concludes
with a Quick Reference Guide that points to the most important topics for implementors. The Quick
Reference Guide may be the fastest guide for usefully skimming a chapter.
    Part 1 of the book aims to familiarize the reader with the rules and philosophy of network algorith-
mics. It starts with Chapter 2, which describes simple models of protocols, operating systems, hardware
design, and endnode and router architectures. Chapter 3 describes in detail the 15 principles used as
a cornerstone for the book. Chapter 4 rounds out the first part by providing 15 examples, drawn for
the most part from real implementation problems, to allow the reader a first opportunity to see the
principles in action on real problems.
    Part 2 of the book, called “Playing with Endnodes,” shows how to build fast endnode implemen-
tations, such as Web servers, that run on general-purpose operating systems and standard computer
architectures. It starts with Chapter 5, which shows how to reduce or avoid extra data copying. (Copy-
ing often occurs when network data is passed between implementation modules) and how to increase
xxii       Preface



cache efficiency. Chapter 6 shows how to reduce or avoid the overhead of transferring control between
implementation modules, such as the device driver, the kernel, and the application. Chapter 7 describes
how to efficiently manage thousands of outstanding timers, a critical issue for large servers. Chap-
ter 8 describes how to efficiently demultiplex data to receiving applications in a single step, allowing
innovations such as user-level networking. Chapter 9 describes how to implement specific functions
that often recur in specific protocol implementations, such as buffer allocation, checksums, sequence
number bookkeeping, and reassembly. An overview of Part 2 can be found in Fig. 1.1.
    Part 3 of the book, called “Playing with Routers,” shows how to build fast routers, bridges, and
gateways. It begins with three chapters that describe state lookups of increasing complexity. Chapter 10
describes exact-match lookups, which are essential for the design of bridges and ARP caches. Chap-
ter 11 describes prefix-match lookups, which are used by Internet routers to forward packets. Chapter 12
describes packet classification, a more sophisticated form of lookup required for security and quality of
service. Chapter 13 describes how to build crossbar switches, which interconnect input and output links
of devices such as routers. Finally, Chapter 14 describes packet-scheduling algorithms, which are used
to provide quality-of-service, and Chapter 15 discusses routers as distributed systems, with examples
focusing on performance and the use of design and reasoning techniques from distributed algorithms.
While this list of functions seems short, one can build a fast router by designing a fast lookup algorithm,
a fast switch, and fast packet-scheduling algorithms. Part 4, called “Endgame,” starts by speculating on
the potential need for implementing more complex tasks in the future. For example, Chapter 16 de-
scribes efficient implementation techniques for measurement primitives, while Chapter 17 describes
efficient implementation techniques for security primitives. The book ends with a short chapter, Chap-
ter 18, which reaches closure by distilling the unities that underly the many different topics in this book.
This chapter also briefly presents examples of the use of algorithmics in a canonical router (the Cisco
GSR) and a canonical server (the Flash Web server). A more detailed overview of Parts 3 and 4 of the
book can be found in Fig. 1.2.



Features
The book has the following features that readers, implementors, students, and instructors can take
advantage of.
Intuitive introduction: The introductory paragraph of each chapter in Parts 2, 3, and 4 uses an intu-
    itive, real-world analogy to motivate each bottleneck. For example, we use the analogy of making
    multiple photocopies of a document for data copying and the analogy of a flight database for prefix
    lookups.
Quick Reference Guide: For readers familiar with a topic and pressed for time, the opening section
    of each chapter concludes with a Quick Reference Guide that points to the most important imple-
    mentation ideas and the corresponding section numbers.
Chapter organization: To help orient the reader, immediately after the Quick Reference Guide in
    each chapter is a map of the entire chapter.
Summary of techniques: To emphasize the correlation between principles and techniques, at the start
    of each chapter is a table that summarizes the techniques described, together with the corresponding
    principles.
                                                               Why this book was written            xxiii



Consistent use of principles: After a detailed description in Chapter 3 of 15 principles, the rest of the
   book consistently uses these principles in describing specific techniques. For reference, the princi-
   ples are summarized inside the front cover. Principles are referred to consistently by number—for
   example, P9 for Principle 9. Since principle numbers are hard to remember, three aids are provided.
   Besides the inside front cover summary and the summary at the start of each chapter, the first use
   of a principle in any chapter is accompanied by an explicit statement of the principle.
Exercises: Chapter 4 of the book provides a set of real-life examples of applying the principles that
   have been enjoyed by past attendees of tutorials on network algorithmics. Every subsequent chapter
   through Chapter 17 is followed by a set of exercises. Brief solutions to these exercises can be found
   in an instructor’s manual obtainable from Elsevier.
Additional Teacher and Student Resources: Helpful ancillaries have been prepared to aid learning
   and teaching.
    • For students, resources are available here: https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/book-
      companion/9780443136795.
    • For qualified professors, instructor-only teaching materials (including Lecture slides in PDF for
      most chapters) can be requested here: https://educate.elsevier.com/book/details/9780128099278.



Usage
This book can be used in many ways.
Textbook: Students and instructors can use this book as the basis of a one-semester class. A semester
    class on network algorithmics can include most of Part 1 and can sample chapters from Part 2 (e.g.,
    Chapter 5 on copying, Chapter 6 on control overhead) and from Part 3 (e.g., Chapter 11 on prefix
    lookups, Chapter 13 on switching).
Implementation guide: Implementors who care about performance may wish to read all of Part 1 and
    then sample Parts 2 and 3 according to their needs.
Reference book: Implementors and students can also use this book as a reference book in addition to
    other books on network protocols.



Why this book was written
The impetus for this book came from my academic research into efficient protocol implementation. It
also came from three networking products I worked on with colleagues: the first bridge, the Gigaswitch,
and the Procket 40 Gbps router. To prove itself against detractors, the first bridge was designed to
operate at wire speed, an idea that spread to routers and the entire industry. My experience watching
the work of Mark Kempf on the first bridge (see Chapter 10) led to a lasting interest in speeding up
networking devices.
    Next, the DEC Gigaswitch introduced me to the world of switching. Finally, the Procket router
was designed by an interdisciplinary team that included digital designers who had designed processors,
experts who had written vast amounts of the software in core routers, and some people like myself who
xxiv      Preface



were interested in algorithms. Despite the varied backgrounds, the team produced innovative new ideas,
which convinced me of the importance of interdisciplinary thinking for performance breakthroughs.
This motivated the writing of Chapter 2 on implementation models, an attempt to bridge the gaps
between the different communities involved in high-performance designs.
    For several years, I taught a class that collected together these techniques. The 15 principles emerged
as a way to break up the techniques more finely and systematically. In retrospect, some principles seem
redundant and glib. However, they serve as part of a first attempt to organize a vast amount of material.
    I have taught five classes and three tutorials based on the material in this book, and so this book has
been greatly influenced by student responses and ideas.



Acknowledgments
A special thanks to my editors: Karen Gettman and Rick Adams and Karyn Johnson; to all my advi-
sors, who taught me so much: Wushow Chou, Arne Nillson, Baruch Awerbuch, Nancy Lynch; to all
my mentors: Alan Kirby, Radia Perlman, Tony Lauck, Bob Thomas, Bob Simcoe, Jon Turner; to nu-
merous colleages at DEC and other companies, especially to Sharad Merhotra, Bill Lynch, and Tony
Li of Procket Networks, who taught me about real routers; to students who adventured in the field of
network algorithmics with me; to numerous reviewers of this book and especially to Jon Snader, Tony
Lauck, Brian Kernighan, Craig Partridge, and Radia Perlman for detailed comments; to Kevin D’Souza,
Stefano Previdi, Anees Shaikh, and Darryl Veitch for their reviews and ideas; to my family, my mother,
my wife’s father and mother, and my sister; and, of course, to my wife, Aju, and my sons, Tim and
Andrew.
    I’d like to end by acknowledging my heroes: four teachers who have influenced me. The first is
Leonard Bernstein, who taught me in his lectures on music that a teacher’s enthusiasm for the material
can be infectious. The second is George Polya, who taught me in his books on problem solving that
the process of discovery is as important as the final discoveries themselves. The third is Socrates, who
taught me through Plato that it is worth always questioning assumptions. The fourth is Jesus, who has
taught me that life, and indeed this book, is not a matter of merit but of grace and gift.
15 principles used to overcome network
bottlenecks


    Number                      Principle                Used In/Networking Example
    P1       Avoid obvious waste                         Zero-copy interfaces
    P2       Shift computation in time
      P2a      Precompute                                Application device channels
      P2b      Evaluate lazily                           Copy-on-write
      P2c      Share expenses, batch                     Integrated layer processing
    P3       Relax system requirements
      P3a      Trade certainty for time                  Stochastic fair queueing
      P3b      Trade accuracy for time                   Switch load balancing
      P3c      Shift computation in space                IPv6 fragmentation
    P4       Leverage off system components
      P4a      Exploit locality                          Locality-driven receiver
      P4b      Trade memory for speed                    Processing; Lulea IP lookups
      P4c      Exploit existing hardware                 Fast TCP checksum
    P5       Add hardwareg
      P5a      Use memory interleaving and pipelinin     Pipelined IP lookups
      P5b      Use wide word parallelism                 Shared memory switches
      P5c      Combine DRAM and SRAM effectively         Maintaining counters
    P6       Create efficient specialized routines       UDP checksums
    P7       Avoid unnecessary generality                Fbufs
    P8       Don’t be tied to reference implementation   Upcalls
    P9       Pass hints in layer interfaces              Packet filters
    P10      Pass hints in protocol headers              Tag switching
    P11      Optimize the expected case                  Header prediction
      P11a     Use caches                                  Fbufs
    P12      Add state for speed                         Active VC list
      P12a     Compute incrementally                       Recomputing CRCs
    P13      Optimize degrees of freedom                 IP trie lookups
    P14      Use bucket sorting, bitmaps                 Timing wheels
    P15      Create efficient data structures            Level-4 switching




                                                                                        xxv
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                                      PART

The rules of the game
                                                                                   1
                                                      “Come, Watson, come!” he cried. “The game is afoot!”
                                                                 —Arthur Conan Doyle in The Abbey Grange


The first part of this book deals with specifying the rules of the network algorithmics game. We start with
a quick introduction where we define network algorithmics and contrast it to algorithm design. Next,
we present models of protocols, operating systems, processor architecture, and hardware design; these
are the key disciplines used in the rest of the book. Then we present a set of 15 principles abstracted
from the specific techniques presented later in the book. Part 1 ends with a set of sample problems
together with solutions obtained using the principles. Implementors pressed for time should skim the
Quick Reference Guides directly following the introduction to each chapter.
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                                                       CHAPTER


Introducing network algorithmics
                                                                                                           1
                        What really makes it an invention is that someone decides not to change the solution to a known
                                                                                   problem, but to change the question.
                                                                                                        —Dean Kamen



Just as the objective of chess is to checkmate the opponent and the objective of tennis is to win matches,
the objective of the network algorithmics game is to battle networking implementation bottlenecks.
    Beyond specific techniques, this book distills a fundamental way of crafting solutions to internet
bottlenecks that we call network algorithmics. This provides the reader tools to design different im-
plementations for specific contexts and to deal with new bottlenecks that will undoubtedly arise in the
changing world of networks.
    So what is network algorithmics? Network algorithmics goes beyond the design of efficient algo-
rithms for networking tasks, though this has an important place. In particular, network algorithmics
recognizes the primary importance of taking an interdisciplinary systems approach to streamlining net-
work implementations.
    Network algorithmics is an interdisciplinary approach because it encompasses such fields as ar-
chitecture and operating systems (for speeding up servers), hardware design (for speeding up network
devices such as routers), and algorithm design (for designing scalable algorithms). Network algorith-
mics is also a systems approach, because it is described in this book using a set of 15 principles that
exploit the fact that routers and servers are systems, in which efficiencies can be gained by moving
functions in time and space between subsystems.
    The problems addressed by network algorithmics are fundamental networking performance bottle-
necks. The solutions advocated by network algorithmics are a set of fundamental techniques to address
these bottlenecks. Next, we provide a quick preview of both the bottlenecks and the methods.



1.1 The problem: network bottlenecks
The main problem considered in this book is how to make networks easy to use while at the same time
realizing the performance of the raw hardware. Ease of use comes from the use of powerful network
abstractions, such as socket interfaces and prefix-based forwarding. Unfortunately, without care, such
abstractions exact a large performance penalty when compared to the capacity of raw transmission
links such as optical fiber. To study this performance gap in more detail, we examine two fundamental
categories of networking devices, endnodes and routers.
Network Algorithmics. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-809927-8.00006-3
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                                     3
4         Chapter 1 Introducing network algorithmics



1.1.1 Endnode bottlenecks
Endnodes are the endpoints of the network. They include personal computers and workstations as well
as large servers that provide services. Endnodes are specialized toward computation, as opposed to
networking, and are typically designed to support general-purpose computation. Thus endnode bottle-
necks are typically the result of two forces: structure and scale.
• Structure: To be able to run arbitrary code, personal computers and large servers typically have
  an operating system that mediates between applications and the hardware. To ease the software
  development, most large operating systems are carefully structured as layered software; to pro-
  tect the operating system from other applications, operating systems implement a set of protection
  mechanisms; finally, core operating systems routines, such as schedulers and allocators, are written
  using general mechanisms that target as wide a class of applications as possible. Unfortunately, the
  combination of layered software, protection mechanisms, and excessive generality can slow down
  networking software greatly, even with the fastest processors.
• Scale: The emergence of large servers providing Web and other services causes further performance
  problems. In particular, a large server such as a Web server will typically have thousands of con-
  current clients. Many operating systems use inefficient data structures and algorithms that were
  designed for an era when the number of connections was small.
    Fig. 1.1 previews the main endnode bottlenecks covered in this book, together with causes and so-
lutions. The first bottleneck occurs because conventional operating system structures cause packet data
copying across protection domains; the situation is further complicated in Web servers by similar copy-
ing with respect to the file system and by other manipulations, such as checksums, that examine all the




FIGURE 1.1
Preview of endnode bottlenecks, solutions to which are described in Part 2 of the book.
                                                  1.1 The problem: network bottlenecks                   5



packet data. Chapter 5 describes a number of techniques to reduce these overheads while preserving the
goals of system abstractions, such as protection and structure. The second major overhead is the control
overhead caused by switching between threads of control (or protection domains) while processing a
packet; this is addressed in Chapter 6.
   Networking applications use timers to deal with failure. With a large number of connections, the
timer overhead at a server can become large; this overhead is addressed in Chapter 7. Similarly, network
messages must be demultiplexed (i.e., steered) on receipt to the right end application; techniques to
address this bottleneck are addressed in Chapter 8. Finally, there are several other common protocol
processing tasks, such as buffer allocation and checksums, which are addressed in Chapter 9.


1.1.2 Router bottlenecks
Though we concentrate on Internet routers, almost all the techniques described in this book apply
equally well to any other network devices, such as bridges, switches, gateways, monitors, and security
appliances, and to protocols other than IP, such as FiberChannel.
    Thus throughout the rest of the book, it is often useful to think of a router as a “generic network in-
terconnection device.” Unlike endnodes, these are special-purpose devices devoted to networking. Thus
there is very little structural overhead within a router, with only the use of a very lightweight operat-
ing system and a clearly separated forwarding path that often is completely implemented in hardware.
Instead of structure, the fundamental problems faced by routers are caused by scale and services.
• Scale: Network devices face two areas of scaling: bandwidth scaling and population scaling. Band-
  width scaling occurs because optical links keep getting faster, as the progress from 1-Gbps to
  40-Gbps links shows, and because Internet traffic keeps growing due to a diverse set of new ap-
  plications. Population scaling occurs because more endpoints get added to the Internet as more
  enterprises go online.
• Services: The need for speed and scale drove much of the networking industry in the 1980s and
  1990s as more businesses went online (e.g., Amazon.com) and whole new online services were cre-
  ated (e.g., eBay). But the very success of the Internet requires careful attention in the next decade
  to make it more effective by providing guarantees in terms of performance, security, and reliability.
  After all, if manufacturers (e.g., Dell) sell more online than by other channels, it is important to pro-
  vide network guarantees—delay in times of congestion, protection during attacks, and availability
  when failures occur. Finding ways to implement these new services at high speeds will be a major
  challenge for router vendors in the next decade.
    Fig. 1.2 previews the main router (bridge/gateway) bottlenecks covered in this book, together with
causes and solutions.
    First, all networking devices forward packets to their destination by looking up a forwarding table.
The simplest forwarding table lookup does an exact match with a destination address, as exemplified by
bridges. Chapter 10 describes fast and scalable exact-match lookup schemes. Unfortunately, population
scaling has made lookups far more complex for routers. To deal with large Internet populations, routers
keep a single entry called a prefix (analogous to a telephone area code) for a large group of stations.
Thus routers must do a more complex longest-prefix-match lookup. Chapter 11 describes solutions to
this problem that scale to increasing speeds and table sizes.
6         Chapter 1 Introducing network algorithmics




FIGURE 1.2
Preview of router bottlenecks, solutions to which are described in Parts 3 and 4 of the book.


    Many routers today offer what is sometimes called service differentiation, where different packets
can be treated differently in order to provide service and security guarantees. Unfortunately, this re-
quires an even more complex form of lookup called packet classification, in which the lookup is based
on the destination, source, and even the services that a packet is providing. This challenging issue is
tackled in Chapter 12.
    Next, all networking devices can be abstractly considered as switches that shunt packets coming in
from a set of input links to a set of output links. Thus a fundamental issue is that of building a high-
speed switch. This is hard, especially in the face of the growing gap between optical and electronic
speeds. The standard solution is to use parallelism via a crossbar switch. Unfortunately, it is nontrivial
to schedule a crossbar at high speeds, and parallelism is limited by a phenomenon known as head-of-
line blocking. Worse, population scaling and optical multiplexing are forcing switch vendors to build
switches with a large number of ports (e.g., 256), which exacerbates these other problems. Solutions to
these problems are described in Chapter 13.
    While the previous bottlenecks are caused by scaling, the next bottleneck is caused by the need for
new services. The issue of providing performance guarantees at high speeds is treated in Chapter 14,
where the issue of implementing so-called QoS (quality of service) mechanisms is studied. Chapter 15
briefly surveys another bottleneck that is becoming an increasing problem: the issue of bandwidth
within a router. It describes sample techniques, such as striping across internal buses and chip-to-chip
links.
                                               1.2 The techniques: network algorithmics                      7



    The final sections of the book take a brief look at emerging services that must, we believe, be part of
a well-engineered Internet of the future. First, routers of the future must build in support for measure-
ment, because measurement is the key to engineering networks to provide guarantees. While routers
today provide some support for measurement in terms of counters and NetFlow records, Chapter 16
also considers more innovative measurement mechanisms that may be implemented in the future.
    Chapter 17 describes security support, some of which is already being built into routers. Given the
increased sophistication, virulence, and rate of network attacks, we believe that implementing security
features in networking devices (whether routers or dedicated intrusion prevention/detection devices)
will be essential. Further, unless the security device can keep up with high-speed links, the device may
miss vital information required to spot an attack.



1.2 The techniques: network algorithmics
Throughout this book, we will talk of many specific techniques: of interrupts, copies, and timing
wheels; of Pathfinder and Sting; of why some routers are very slow; and whether Web servers can
scale. But what underlies the assorted techniques in this book and makes it more than a recipe book
is the notion of network algorithmics. As said earlier, network algorithmics recognizes the primary
importance of taking a systems approach to streamlining network implementations.
    While everyone recognizes that the Internet is a system consisting of routers and links, it is perhaps
less obvious that every networking device, from the Cisco GSR to an Apache Web server, is also a sys-
tem. A system is built out of interconnected subsystems that are instantiated at various points in time.
For example, a core router consists of line cards with forwarding engines and packet memories con-
nected by a crossbar switch. The router behavior is affected by decisions at various time scales, which
range from manufacturing time (when default parameters are stored in NVRAM) to route computation
time (when routers conspire to compute routes) to packet-forwarding time (when packets are sent to
adjoining routers).
    Thus one key observation in the systems approach is that one can often design an efficient sub-
system by moving some of its functions in space (i.e., to other subsystems) or in time (i.e., to points
in time before or after the function is apparently required). In some sense, the practitioner of network
algorithmics is an unscrupulous opportunist willing to change the rules at any time to make the game
easier. The only constraint is that the functions provided by the overall system continue to satisfy users.
    In one of Mark Twain’s books, a Connecticut Yankee is transported back in time to King Arthur’s
court. The Yankee then uses a gun to fight against dueling knights accustomed to jousting with lances.
This is an example of changing system assumptions (replacing lances by guns) to solve a problem
(winning a duel).
    Considering the constraints faced by the network implementor at high speeds—increasingly com-
plex tasks, larger systems to support, small amounts of high-speed memory, and a small number of
memory accesses—it may require every trick, every gun in one’s arsenal, to keep pace with the increas-
ing speed and scale of the Internet. The designer can throw hardware at the problem, change the system
assumptions, design a new algorithm—whatever it takes to get the job done.
    This book is divided into four parts. The first part, of which this is the first chapter, lays a foundation
for applying network algorithmics to packet processing. The second chapter of the first part outlines
models, and the third chapter presents general principles used in the remainder of the book.
8         Chapter 1 Introducing network algorithmics




FIGURE 1.3
Getting wind of an evil packet by noticing the frequency of unprintable characters.


   One of the best ways to get a quick idea about what network algorithmics is about is to plunge right
away into a warm-up example. While the warm-up example that follows is in the context of a device
within the network where new hardware can be designed, note that Part 2 is about building efficient
servers using only software design techniques.


1.2.1 Warm-up example: scenting an evil packet
Imagine a front-end network monitor (or intrusion detection system) on the periphery of a corporate
network that wishes to flag suspicious incoming packets—packets that could contain attacks on internal
computers. A common such attack is a buffer overflow attack, where the attacker places machine code
C in a network header field F .
    If the receiving computer allocates a buffer too small for header field F and is careless about check-
ing for overflow, the code C can spill onto the receiving machine’s stack. With a little more effort, the
intruder can make the receiving machine actually execute evil code C. C then takes over the receiver
machine. Fig. 1.3 shows such an attack embodied in a familiar field, a destination Web URL (uniform
resource locator). How might the monitor detect the presence of such a suspicious URL? A possible
way is to observe that URLs containing evil code are often too long (an easy check) and often have a
large fraction of unusual (at least in URLs) characters, such as #. Thus the monitor could mark such
packets (containing URLs that are too long and have too many occurrences of such unusual characters)
for a more thorough examination.
    It is worth stating at the outset that the security implications of this strategy need to be carefully
thought out. For example, there may be several innocuous programs, such as CGI scripts, in URLs that
lead to false positives. Without getting too hung up in overall architectural implications, let us assume
that this was a specification handed down to a chip architect by a security architect. We now use this
sample problem, suggested by Mike Fisk, to illustrate algorithmics in action.
    Faced with such a specification, a chip designer may use the following design process, which illus-
trates some of the principles of network algorithmics. The process starts with a strawman design and
refines the design using techniques such as designing a better algorithm, relaxing the specification, and
exploiting hardware.


1.2.2 Strawman solution
The check of overall length is straightforward to implement, so we concentrate on checking for a
prevalence of suspicious characters. The first strawman solution is illustrated in Fig. 1.4. The chip
                                                  1.2 The techniques: network algorithmics                        9




FIGURE 1.4
Strawman solution for detecting an evil packet by counting occurrences of each character via a count array (middle)
and then comparing in a final pass with an array of acceptable thresholds (left).


maintains two arrays, T and C, with 256 elements each, one for each possible value of an 8-bit character.
The threshold array, T -, contains the acceptable percentage (as a fraction of the entire URL length) for
each character. If the occurrences of a character in an actual URL fall above this fraction, the packet
should be flagged. Each character can have a different threshold.
    The count array, C, in the middle, contains the current count C[i] for each possible character i.
When the chip reads a new character “i” in the URL, it increments C[i] by 1. C[i] is initialized to 0 for
all values of i when a new packet is encountered. The incrementing process starts only after the chip
parses the HTTP header and recognizes the start of a URL.
    In HTTP, the end of a URL is signified by two newline characters; thus one can tell the length of the
URL only after parsing the entire URL string. Thus, after the end of the URL is encountered, the chip
makes a final pass over the array C. If C[ j ] ≥ L · T [ j ] for any j , where L is the length of the URL,
the packet is flagged.
    Assume that packets are coming into the monitor at high speed and that we wish to finish processing
a packet before the next one arrives. This requirement, called wire-speed processing, is very common in
networking; it prevents processing backlogs even in the worst case. To meet wire-speed requirements,
ideally the chip should do a small constant number of operations for every URL byte. Assume the main
step of incrementing a counter can be done in the time to receive a byte.
    Unfortunately, the two passes over the array, first to initialize it and then to check for threshold
violations, make this design slow. Minimum packet sizes are often as small as 40 bytes and include
only network headers. Adding 768 more operations (1 write and 1 read to each element of C, and 1
read of T for each of 256 indices) can make this design infeasible.


1.2.3 Thinking algorithmically
Intuitively, the second pass through the arrays C and T at the end seems like a waste. For example,
it suffices to alarm if any character is over the threshold. So why check all characters? This suggests
keeping track only of the largest character count c; at the end, perhaps the algorithm needs to check
only whether c is over threshold with respect to the total URL length L.
10        Chapter 1 Introducing network algorithmics




FIGURE 1.5
Avoiding the final loop through the threshold array by keeping track only of Max, the highest counter encountered so
far relative to its threshold value.


    This does not quite work. A nonsuspicious character such as “e” may well have a very high occur-
rence count. However, “e” is also likely to be specified with a high threshold. Thus if we keep track only
of “e” with, say, a count of 20, we may not keep track of “#” with, say, a count of 10. If the threshold of
“#” is much smaller, the algorithm may cause a false negative: The chip may fail to alarm on a packet
that should be flagged.
    The counterexample suggests the following fix. The chip keeps track in a register of the highest
counter relativized to the threshold value. More precisely, the chip keeps track of the highest relativized
counter Max corresponding to some character k, such that C[k]/T [k] = Max is the highest among all
characters encountered so far. If a new character i is read, the chip increments C[i]. If C[i]/T [i] > Max,
then the chip replaces the current stored value of Max with C[i]/T [i]. At the end of URL processing,
the chip alarms if Max ≥ L.
    Here’s why this works. If Max = C[k]/T[k] ≥ L, clearly the packet must be flagged, because char-
acter k is over threshold. On the other hand, if C[k]/T [k] < L, then for any character i, it follows that
C[i]/T [i] ≤ C[k]/T [k] < L. Thus if Max falls below threshold, then no character is above threshold.
Thus there can be no false negatives. This solution is shown in Fig. 1.5.


1.2.4 Refining the algorithm: exploiting hardware
The new algorithm has eliminated the loop at the end but still has to deal with a divide operation while
processing each byte. Divide logic is somewhat complicated and worth avoiding if possible—but how?
    Returning to the specification and its intended use, it seems likely that thresholds are not meant to
be exact floating-point numbers. It is unlikely that the architect providing thresholds can estimate the
values precisely; one is likely to approximate 2.78% as 3% without causing much difference to the
security goals. So why not go further and approximate the threshold by some power of 2 less than the
exact intended threshold? Thus if the threshold is 1/29, why not approximate it as 1/32?
    Changing the specification in this way requires negotiation with the system architect. Assume that
the architect agrees to this new proposal. Then a threshold such as 1/32 can be encoded compactly as
                                                 1.2 The techniques: network algorithmics              11




FIGURE 1.6
Using a wide word and a coalesced array to combine 2 reads into one.


the corresponding power of 2—i.e., 5. This threshold shift value can be stored in the threshold array
instead of a fraction.
     Thus when a character j is encountered, the chip increments C[ j ] as usual and then shifts C[ j ]
to the left—dividing by 1/x is the same as multiplying by x—by the specified threshold. If the shifted
value is higher than the last stored value for Max, the chip replaces the old value with the new value
and marches on.
     Thus the logic required to implement the processing of a byte is a simple shift-and-compare. The
stored state is only a single register to store Max. As it stands, however, the design requires a Read to
the Threshold array (to read the shift value), a Read to the Count array (to read the old count), and a
Write to the Count array (to write back the incremented value).
     Now reads to memory—1–2 nsec even for the fastest on-chip memories but possibly even as slow
as 10 nsec for slower memories—are slower than logic. Single gate delays are only in the order of
picoseconds, and shift logic does not require too many gate delays. Thus the processing bottleneck is
the number of memory accesses.
     The chip implementation can combine the 2 Reads to memory into 1 Read by coalescing the Count
and Threshold arrays into a single array, as shown in Fig. 1.6. The idea is to make the memory words
wide enough to hold the counter (say, 15 bits to handle packets of length 32K) and the threshold (de-
pending on the precision necessary, no more than 14 bits). Thus the two fields can easily be combined
into a larger word of size 29 bits. In practice, hardware can handle much larger words sizes of up to
1000 bits. Also, note that extracting the two fields packed into a single word, quite a chore in software,
is trivial in hardware by routing wires appropriately between registers or by using multiplexers.


1.2.5 Cleaning up
We have postponed one thorny issue to this point. The terminal loop has been eliminated while leaving
the initial initialization loop. To handle this, note that the chip has spare time for initialization after
parsing the URL of the current packet and before encountering the URL of the next packet.
    Unfortunately, packets can be as small as 50 bytes, even with an HTTP header. Thus even assuming
a slack of 40 non-URL bytes other than the 10 bytes of the URL, this still does not suffice to initialize
12        Chapter 1 Introducing network algorithmics



a 256-byte array without paying 256/40 = 6 more operations per byte than during the processing of
a URL. As in the URL processing loop, each initialization step requires a Read and Write of some
element of the coalesced array.
    A trick among lazy people is to postpone work until it is absolutely needed, in the hope that it may
never be needed. Note that, strictly speaking, the chip does not need to initialize a C[i] until character i
is accessed for the first time in a subsequent packet. But how can the chip tell that it is seeing character
i for the first time?
    To implement lazy evaluation, each memory word representing an entry in the coalesced array must
be expanded to include, say, a 3-bit generation number G[i]. The generation number can be thought of
as a value of clock time measured in terms of packets encountered so far, except that it is limited to 3
bits. Thus, the chip keeps an additional register g, besides the extra G[i] for each i, that is 3 bits long;
g is incremented mod 8 for every packet encountered. In addition, every time C[i] is updated, the chip
updates G[i] as well to reflect the current value of g.
    Given the generation numbers, the chip need not initialize the count array after the current packet has
been processed. However, consider the case of a packet whose generation number is h, which contains
a character i in its URL. When the chip encounters i while processing the packet, the chip reads C[i]
and G[i] from the Count array. If G[i] = h, this clearly indicates that entry i was last accessed by an
earlier packet and has not been subsequently initialized. Thus the logic will write back the value of C[i]
as 1 (initialization plus increment) and set G[i] to h. This is shown in Fig. 1.7.
    The careful reader will immediately object. Since the generation number is only 3 bits, once the
value of g wraps around, there can be aliasing. Thus if G[i] is 5 and entry i is not accessed until eight
more packets have gone by, g will have wrapped around to 5. If the next packet contains i, C[i] will
not be initialized and the count will (wrongly) accumulate the count of i in the current packet together
with the count that occurred eight packets in the past.
    The chip can avoid such aliasing by doing a separate “scrubbing” loop that reads the array and
initializes all counters with outdated generation numbers. For correctness, the chip must guarantee one
complete scan through the array for every eight packets processed. Given that one has a slack of (say)
40 non-URL bytes per packet, this guarantees a slack of 320 non-URL bytes after eight packets, which
suffices to initialize a 256-element array using one Read and one Write per byte, whether the byte is a




FIGURE 1.7
The final solution with generation numbers to finesse an initialization loop.
                                              1.2 The techniques: network algorithmics                  13



URL or a non-URL byte. Clearly, the designer can gain more slack, if needed, by increasing the bits in
the generation number, at the cost of slightly increased storage in the array.
    The chip, then, must have two states: one for processing URL bytes and one for processing non-
URL bytes. When the URL is completely processed, the chip switches to the “Scrub” state. The chip
maintains another register, which points to the next array entry s to be scrubbed. In the scrub state,
when a non-URL character is received, the chip reads entry s in the coalesced array. If G[s] = g, G[s]
is reset to g and C[s] is initialized to 0.
    Thus the use of 3 extra bits of generation number per array entry has reduced initialization process-
ing cycles, trading processing for storage. Altogether a coalesced array entry is now only 32 bits, 15
bits for a counter, 14 bits for a threshold shift value, and 3 bits for a generation number. Note that the
added initialization check needed during URL byte processing does not increase memory references
(the bottleneck) but adds slightly to the processing logic. In addition, it requires two more chip registers
to hold g and s, a small additional expense.


1.2.6 Characteristics of network algorithmics
The example of scenting an evil packet illustrates three important aspects of network algorithmics.
a. Network algorithmics is interdisciplinary: Given the high rates at which network processing must
   be done, a router designer would be hard pressed not to use hardware. The example exploited several
   features of hardware: It assumed that wide words of arbitrary size were easily possible; it assumed
   that shifts were easier than divides; it assumed that memory references were the bottleneck; it as-
   sumed that a 256-element array contained in fast on-chip memory was feasible; it assumed that
   adding a few extra registers was feasible; and finally it assumed that small changes to the logic to
   combine URL processing and initialization were trivial to implement.
      For the reader unfamiliar with hardware design, this is a little like jumping into a game of cards
   without knowing the rules and then finding oneself finessed and trumped in unexpected ways. A con-
   tention of this book is that mastery of a few relevant aspects of hardware design can help even a
   software designer understands at least the feasibility of different hardware designs. A further con-
   tention of this book is that such interdisciplinary thinking can help produce the best designs.
      Thus Chapter 2 presents the rules of the game. It presents simple models of hardware that point
   out opportunities for finessing and trumping troublesome implementation issues. It also presents
   simple models of operating systems. This is done because end systems such as clients and Web
   servers require tinkering with and understanding operating system issues to improve performance,
   just as routers and network devices require tinkering with hardware.
b. Network algorithmics recognizes the primacy of systems thinking: The specification was relaxed
   to allow approximate thresholds in powers of 2, which simplified the hardware. Relaxing specifica-
   tions and moving work from one subsystem to another is an extremely common systems technique,
   but it is not encouraged by current educational practice in universities, in which each area is taught
   in isolation.
      Thus today, one has separate courses in algorithms, in operating systems, and in networking.
   This tends to encourage “black box” thinking instead of holistic or systems thinking. The example
   alluded to other systems techniques, such as the use of lazy evaluation and trading memory for
   processing in order to scrub the Count array.
