                                     4.1 Buffer validation of application device channels                         77



validation process be sped up? Try thinking through the solution before reading the hint and solutions
that follow.

Hint: A good approach to reduce the complexity of validation is to use a better data structure than
a list (P15). Which data structure would you choose? However, one can improve worst-case behavior
even further and get smaller constant factors by using system thinking and by passing hints in
interfaces (P9).
    An algorithmic thinker will immediately consider implementing the set of valid pages as a hash
table instead of a list. This provides an O(1) average search time. Hashing has two disadvan-
tages: (1) good hash functions that have small collision probabilities are expensive computationally;
(2) hashing does not provide a good worst-case bound. Binary search does provide logarithmic worst-
case search times, but this is expensive (it also requires keeping the set sorted) if the set of pages
is large and packet transmission rates are higher. Instead, we replace the hash table lookup by an
indexed array lookup, as follows (try using P9 before you read on).


Solution
The adaptor stores the set of valid pages for each application in an array, as shown in Fig. 4.2. This array
is updated only when the kernel updates the set of valid pages for the application. When the application
does a Receive into page A, it also passes to the adaptor a handle (P9). The handle is the index of the
array position where A is stored. The adaptor can use this to quickly confirm whether the page in the
Receive request matches the page stored in the handle. The cost of validation is a bounds check (to see
if the handle is a valid index), one array lookup, and one compare.

Exercises

• Is the handle a hint or a tip? Let’s invoke principle P1: If this is a handle, why pass the page number
  (e.g., A) in the interface? Why does removing the page number speed up the confirmation task
  slightly?




FIGURE 4.2
Finessing the need for a hash table lookup by passing a handle across the interface between the application and
adaptor.
78        Chapter 4 Principles in action



• To find the array corresponding to application P normally requires a hash table search using P as
  the key. This weakens the argument for getting rid of the hash table search to check if the page is
  valid—unless, of course, the hash search of P can be finessed as well. How can this be done?



4.2 Scheduler for asynchronous transfer mode flow control
In asynchronous transfer mode (ATM), an ATM adaptor may have hundreds of simultaneous virtual
circuits (VCs) that can send data (called cells). Each VC is often flow controlled in some way to limit
the rate at which it can send. For example, in rate-based flow control, a VC may receive credits to send
cells at fixed time intervals. On the other hand, in credit-based flow control (Kung et al., 1994; Ozveren
et al., 1994), credits may be sent by the next node in the path when buffers free up.
    Thus in Fig. 4.3 the adaptor has a table that holds the VC state. There are four VCs that have been
set up (1, 3, 5, 7). Of these, only VCs 1, 5, and 7 have some cells to send. Finally, only VCs 1 and
7 have credits to send cells. Thus the next cell to be sent by the adaptor should be from either one of
the eligible VCs: 1 or 7. The selection from the eligible VCs should be done fairly, for example, in
round-robin fashion. If the adaptor chooses to send a cell from VC 7, the adaptor would decrement the
credits of VC 7 to 1. Since there are no more cells to be sent, VC 7 now becomes ineligible. Choosing
the next eligible VC leads to the following problem.

Problem
A naive scheduler may cycle through the VC array looking for a VC that is eligible. If many of the VCs
are ineligible, this can be quite inefficient, for the scheduler may have to step through several VCs that
are ineligible to send one cell from an eligible VC. How can this inefficiency be avoided?
Hint: Consider invoking P12 to add some extra state to speed up the scheduler main loop. What
state can you add to avoid stepping through ineligible VCs? How would you maintain this state
efficiently?




FIGURE 4.3
An ATM VC is eligible to send data if it is active (has some outstanding cells to send in the queue shown below the
VC) and has credits (shown by gray dots above the VC). The problem is to select the next eligible VC in some fair
manner without stepping through VCs that are ineligible.
                                         4.3 Route computation using Dijkstra’s algorithm                  79




FIGURE 4.4
Maintaining a list of eligible VCs to speed up the scheduler main loop.


Solution
Maintain a list (Fig. 4.4) of eligible VCs in addition to the VC table of Fig. 4.3. The only problem is to
efficiently maintain this state. This is the major difficulty in using P12. If the state is too expensive to
maintain, the added state is a liability and not an asset. Recall that a VC is eligible if it has both cells to
send and has credits. Thus a VC is removed from the list after service if VC becomes inactive or has no
more credits; if not, the VC is added to the tail of the list to ensure fairness. A VC is added to the tail
of the list either when a cell arrives to an empty VC cell queue and this (empty) queue also has credits
or when the VC has no credits and receives a credit update.

Exercises

• How can you be sure that a VC is not added multiple times to the eligible list?
• Can this scheme be generalized to allow some VCs to get more opportunities to send than other VCs
  based on a weight assigned by a manager?




4.3 Route computation using Dijkstra’s algorithm
How does a router S decide how to route a packet to a given destination D? Every link in a network is
labeled with a cost, and routers like S often compute the shortest (i.e., lowest-cost) paths to destinations
within a local domain. Assume the cost is a small integer. Recall from Chapter 2 that the most com-
monly used routing protocol within a domain is OSPF (Open Shortest Path First) based on link state
routing.
    In link state routing, every router in a subnet sends a link state packet (LSP) that lists its links to
all of its neighbors. Each LSP is sent to every other router in the subnet. Each router sends its LSP
to other routers using a primitive flooding protocol (Perlman, 1992). Once every router receives an
LSP from every router, then every router has a complete map of the network. Assuming the topology
remains stable, each router can now calculate its shortest path to every other node in the network using
a standard shortest-path algorithm, such as Dijkstra’s algorithm (Cormen et al., 1990).
    In Fig. 4.5 source S wishes to calculate a shortest-path tree to all other nodes (A, B, C, D) in the
network. The network is shown on the left frame in Fig. 4.5 with links numbered with their costs. In
Dijkstra’s algorithm S begins by placing only itself in the shortest-path tree. S also updates the cost
to reach all its direct neighbors (e.g., B, A). At each iteration, Dijkstra’s algorithm adds to the current
80        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.5
In Dijkstra’s algorithm the source S builds a shortest-path tree rooted at S. At each stage, the closest node not in the
tree is added to the tree.



tree the node that is closest to the current tree. The costs of the neighbors of this newly added node are
updated. The process repeats until all nodes in the network belong to the tree.
    For instance, in Fig. 4.5, after adding S, the algorithm picks B and then picks A. At this iteration,
the tree is as shown on the right in Fig. 4.5. The solid lines show the existing tree, and the dotted lines
show the best current connections to nodes that are not already in the tree. Thus since A has a cost of
2 and there is a link of cost 3 from A to C, C is labeled with 5. Similarly, D is labeled with a cost of
3 for the path through B. At the next iteration, the algorithm picks D as the least-cost node not already
in the tree. The cost to C is then updated using the route through D. Finally, C is added to the tree in
the last iteration.
    This textbook solution requires determining the node with the least cost that is not already in the
tree at each iteration. The standard data structure to keep track of the minimum-value element in a
dynamically changing set is a priority queue. This leads to the following problem.

Problem
Dijkstra’s algorithm requires a priority queue at each of N iterations, where N is the number of network
nodes. The best general-purpose priority queues, such as heaps (Cormen et al., 1990), take O(log N )
cost to find the minimum element. This implies a total running time of O(N log N ) time. For a large
network, this can result in slow response to failures and other network topology changes. How can route
computation be speeded up?
Hint: Consider exploiting the fact that the link costs are small integers (P14) by using an array to
represent the current costs of nodes. How can you efficiently, at least in an amortized sense, find
the next minimum-cost node to include in the shortest-path tree?

Solution
The fact that the link costs are small integers can be exploited to construct a priority queue based on
bucket sorting (P14). Assume that the largest link cost is MaxLinkCost. Thus the maximum cost of a
path can be no more than Diam ∗ MaxLinkCost, where Diam is the diameter of the network. Assume
Diam is also a small integer. Thus one could imagine using an array with a location for every possible
cost c in the range 1 . . . Diam ∗ MaxLinkCost. If during the course of Dijkstra’s algorithm the current
                                        4.3 Route computation using Dijkstra’s algorithm               81




FIGURE 4.6
Using a priority queue based on bucket sorting to speed up Dijkstra’s algorithm.


cost of a node X is c, then node X can be placed in a list pointed to by element c of the array (Fig. 4.6).
This leads to the following algorithm.
    Whenever a node X changes its cost from c to c , node X is removed from the list for c and added to
the list for c . But how is the minimum element to be found? This can be done by initializing a pointer
called CurrentMin to 0 (which corresponds to the cost of S). Each time the algorithm wishes to find the
minimum-cost node not in the tree, CurrentMin is incremented by 1 until an array location is reached
that contains a nonempty list. Any node in this list can then be added to the tree. The algorithm costs
O(N + Diam ∗ MaxLinkCost) because the work done in advancing CurrentMin can at most be the size
of the array. This can be significantly better than N log N for large N and small values of Diam and
MaxLinkCost.
    A crucial factor in being able to efficiently use a bucket sort priority queue of the kind described
earlier is that the node costs are always ahead of the value of CurrentMin. This is a monotonicity
condition. If it were not true, the algorithm would start checking for the minimum from 1 at each
iteration, instead of starting from the last value of CurrentMin and never backing up. The monotonicity
condition is fairly obvious for Dijktra’s algorithm because the costs of nodes not already in the tree
have to be larger than the costs of nodes that are already in the tree.
    Fig. 4.6 shows the state of the bucket sort priority queue after A has been added to the tree. This
corresponds to the right frame of Fig. 4.5. At this stage, CurrentMin = 2, which is the cost of A. At the
next iteration, CurrentMin will advance to 3, and D will be added to the tree. This will result in the C’s
cost being reduced to 4. We thus remove C from the list in position 5 and add it to the empty list in
position 4. CurrentMin is then advanced to 4, and C is added to the tree.

Exercises

• The algorithm requires a node to be removed from a list and added to another, earlier list. How can
  this be done efficiently?
• In Fig. 4.6 how can the algorithm know that it can terminate after adding C to the tree instead of
  advancing to the end of the long array?
• In networks that have failures, the concept of diameter is a highly suspect one because the diameter
  could change considerably after a failure. Consider a wheel topology where all N nodes have diam-
82       Chapter 4 Principles in action



  eter 2 through a central spoke node; if the central spoke node fails, the diameter goes up to N/2. In
  actual practice the diameter is often small. Can this cause problems in sizing the array?
• Can you circumvent the problem of the diameter completely by replacing the linear array of Fig. 4.6
  with a circular array of size MaxLinkCost? Explain. The resulting solution is known as Dial’s
  algorithm (Ahuja et al., 1993).



4.4 Ethernet monitor using bridge hardware
Alyssa P. Hacker is working for Acme Networks and knows of the Ethernet bridge invented at Acme.
A bridge (see Chapter 10) is a device that can connect Ethernets together. To forward packets from one
Ethernet to another, the bridge must look up the 48-bit destination address in an Ethernet packet at high
speeds.
    Alyssa decides to convert the bridge into an Ethernet traffic monitor that will passively listen to
an Ethernet and produce statistics about traffic patterns. The marketing person tells her that she needs
to monitor traffic between arbitrary source–destination pairs. Thus for every active source–destination
pair, such as A, B, Alyssa must keep a variable PA,B that measures the number of packets sent from A
to B since the monitor was started. When a packet is sent from A to B, the monitor (which is listening
to all packets sent on the cable) will pick up a copy of the packet. If the source is A and the destination is
B, the monitor should increment PA,B . The problem is to do this in 64 µsec, the minimum interpacket
time on the Ethernet. The bottleneck is the lookup of the state PA,B associated with a pair of 48-bit
addresses A, B.
    Fortunately, the bridge hardware has a spiffy lookup hardware engine that can look up the state
associated with a single 48-bit address in 1.4 µsec. A call to the hardware can be expressed as Lookup(X,
D), where X is the 48-bit key and D is the database to be searched. The call returns the state associated
with X in 1.4 µsec for databases of less than 64,000 keys. What Alyssa must solve is the following
problem.

Problem
The monitor needs to update state for AB when a packet from A to B arrives. The monitor has a lookup
engine that can look up only single addresses and not address pairs. How can Alyssa use the existing
engine to look up address pairs? The problem is illustrated in Fig. 4.7.

Hint: The problem requires using P4c to exploit the existing bridge hardware. Since 1.4 µsec is
much smaller than 64 µsec, the design can afford to use more than one hardware lookup. How can
a 96-bit lookup be reduced to a 48-bit lookup using three lookups?
    A naive solution is to use two lookups to convert source A and destination B into smaller
(<24-bit) indices IA and IB . The indices IA and IB can then be used to look up a two-dimensional
array that stores the state for AB. This requires only two hardware lookups plus one more mem-
ory access, but it can require large amounts of memory. If there are 1000 possible sources and
1000 possible destinations, the array must contain a million entries. In practice, there may be
only 20,000 active source–destination pairs. How could you make the required amount of memory
proportional to the number of actual source–destination pairs?
                                                4.4 Ethernet monitor using bridge hardware                        83




FIGURE 4.7
Adapting an engine that does destination lookups to doing source-destination lookups.




FIGURE 4.8
Converting a 96-bit lookup into a 48-bit lookup by first converting each 48-bit address into a 24-bit index and
concatenating the indices.




Solution
As before, first use one lookup each to convert source A and destination B into smaller (<24-bit)
indices IA and IB . Then use a third lookup to map from IA IB to AB state. The solution is illustrated in
Fig. 4.8. The third lookup effectively compresses the two-dimensional array of the naive solution. This
solution is due to Mark Kempf and Mike Soha.

Exercises

• Can this problem be solved using only two bridge hardware lookups without requiring extra mem-
  ory?
• The set of active source–destination pairs may change with time because some pairs of addresses
  stop communicating for long periods. How can this be handled without keeping the state for every
  possible address pair that has communicated since the monitor was powered on?
84        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.9
Demultiplexing in the x-kernel is done by hashing the protocol identifier K and (potentially) using a byte-by-byte
comparison with the key L stored at the hash table entry.



4.5 Demultiplexing in the x-kernel
The x-kernel (Hutchinson and Peterson, 1991) provides a software infrastructure for protocol imple-
mentation in hosts. The x-kernel system provides support for a number of required protocol functions.
One commonly required function is protocol demultiplexing. For example, when the Internet routing
layer IP receives a packet, it must use the protocol field to determine whether the packet should be
subsequently sent to TCP (transmission control protocol) or UDP (user datagram protocol).
    Most protocols do demultiplexing based on some identifier in the protocol header. These identifiers
can vary in length in different protocols. For example, Ethernet-type fields can be 5 bytes while TCP
port numbers are 2 bytes long. Thus the x-kernel allows demultiplexing based on variable-length pro-
tocol identifiers. When the system is initialized, the protocol routine can register the mapping between
the identifier and the destination protocol with the x-kernel. At run time, when a packet arrives the pro-
tocol routine can extract the protocol identifier from the packet and query the x-kernel demultiplexing
routine for the destination protocol. Since packets can arrive at high speeds, the demultiplexing routine
should be fast. This leads to the following problem.

Problem
On average, the fastest way to do a lookup is to use a hash table. As shown in Fig. 4.9, this requires
computing some hash function on the identifier K to generate a hash index, using this index to access
the hash table, and comparing the key L stored in the hash table entry with K. If there is a match, the
demultiplexing routine can retrieve the destination protocol associated with key L. Assume that the
hash function has been chosen to make collisions infrequent.
    However, since the identifier length is an arbitrary number of bytes, the comparison routine that
compares the two keys must, in general, do byte-by-byte comparisons. However, suppose the most
common case is 4-byte identifiers, which is the machine word size. In this case, it is much more efficient
to do a word comparison. Thus the goal is to exploit efficient word comparisons (P4c) to optimize the
expected case (P11). How can this be done while still handling arbitrary protocols?

Hint: Notice that if the x-kernel has to demultiplex a 3-byte identifier, it has to use a byte-by-
byte comparison routine; if the x-kernel has to demultiplex a 4-byte identifier and 4 bytes are the
machine word size, it can use a word compare. The first degree of freedom that can be exploited is
to have different comparison routines for the most common cases (e.g., word compares, long-word
compares) and a default comparison routine that uses byte comparisons. Doing so trades some extra
                                                                4.6 Tries with node compression            85



space for time (P4b). For correctness, however, it is important to know which comparison routine
to use for each protocol. Consider invoking principles P9 to pass hints in interfaces and P2a to do
some precomputation.

Solution
Each protocol has to declare its identifier and destination protocol to the x-kernel when the system
initializes. When this happens, each protocol can predeclare its identifier length, so the x-kernel can use
a specialized comparison routine for each protocol. Effectively, information is being passed between the
client protocol and the x-kernel (P9) at an earlier time (P2a). Assume that the x-kernel has a separate
hash table for each client protocol and that the x-kernel knows the context for each client in order to
use code specialized for thatclient.

Exercises

• Code up byte-by-byte and word comparisons on your machine and do a large number of both types
  of comparisons and compare the overall time taken for each.
• In the earlier ADC solution, the hash table lookup was finessed by passing an index (instead of the
  identifier length as earlier). Why might that solution be difficult in this case?



4.6 Tries with node compression
A trie is a data structure that is a tree of nodes, where each node is an array of M elements. Fig. 4.10
shows a simple example with M = 8. Each array can hold either a key (e.g., KEY 1, KEY 2, or KEY 3
in Fig. 4.10) or a pointer to another trie node (e.g., the first element in the topmost trie node of Fig. 4.10,
which is the root). The trie is used to search for exact matches (and longest-prefix matches) with an
input string. Tries are useful in networking for such varied tasks as IP address lookups (Chapter 11),
bridge lookups (Chapter 10), and demultiplexing filters (Chapter 8).




FIGURE 4.10
Trie storing three keys. Notice the wasted space in the trie nodes.
86       Chapter 4 Principles in action



    The exact trie algorithms do not concern us here. All one needs to know is how a trie is searched.
Let c = log2 M be the chunk size of a trie. To search the trie, search first breaks the input string into
chunks of size c. Search uses successive chunks, starting from the most significant, to index into nodes
of the trie, starting with the root node. When search uses chunk j to index into position i of the current
trie node, position i could contain either a pointer or a key. If position i contains a nonnull pointer to
node N , the search continues at node N with chunk j + 1; otherwise, the search terminates.
    To summarize, each node is an array of pointers or keys, and the search process needs to index
into these arrays. However, if many trie nodes are sparse, there is considerable wasted space (P1). For
example, in Fig. 4.10, only 4 out of 16 locations contain useful information. In the worst case, each
trie node could contain 1 pointer or key and there could be a factor of M in wasted memory. Assume
M ≤ 32 in what follows. Even if M is this small, a 32-fold increase in memory can greatly increase the
cost of the design.
    An obvious approach is to replace each trie node by a linear list of pairs of the form (i, val), where
val is the nonempty value (either pointer or key) in position i of the node. For example, the root trie
node in Fig. 4.10 could be replaced by the list (1, ptr1); (7, KEY 1), where ptr1 is the pointer to the
bottom trie node. Unfortunately, this can slow down trie search by a factor of M, because the search
of each trie node may now have to search through a list of M locations, instead of a single indexing
operation. This leads to the following problem.

Problem
How can trie nodes be compressed to remove null pointers without slowing down search by more than
a small factor?
Hint: Despite compressing the nodes, array indexing needs to be efficient. If the nodes are com-
pressed, how might information about which array elements are removed be represented? Consider
leveraging off the fact that M is small by following P14 (exploit the small integer size) and P4a
(exploit locality).

Solution
Since M < 32, a bitmap of size 32 can easily fit into a computer word (P14 and P4a). Thus null pointers
are removed after adding a bitmap with zero bits indicating the original positions of null pointers. This
is shown in Fig. 4.11. The trie node can now be replaced with a bitmap and a compressed trie node.
A compressed trie node is an array that consists only of the nonnull values in the original node. Thus in
Fig. 4.11, the original root trie node (on the top) has been replaced with the compressed trie node (on
the bottom). The bitmap contains a 1 in the first and seventh positions, where the root node contains
nonnull values. The compressed array now contains only two elements, the first pointer and KEY 3.
This still begs the question: How should a trie node be searched?
    Since both uncompressed and compressed nodes are arrays and the search process starts with an
index I into the uncompressed node, the search process must consult the bitmap to convert the uncom-
pressed index I into a compressed index C into the compressed node. For example, if I is 1 in Fig. 4.11,
C should be 1; if I is 7, C should be 2. If I is any other value, C should be 0, indicating that there is
only a null pointer.
    Fortunately, the conversion from I to C can be accomplished easily by noting the following. If
position I in the bitmap contains a 0, then C = 0. Otherwise, C is the number of 1’s in the first I bits of
the bitmap. Thus if I = 7, then C = 2, since there are two bits set in the first seven bits of the bitmap.
                                                                  4.7 Packet filtering in routers                  87




FIGURE 4.11
Compressing a trie node using a bitmap and bit counting to efficiently translate from an uncompressed index to a
compressed index.


    This computation requires at most two memory references: one to access the bitmap (because the
bitmap is small [P4a]) and one to access the compressed array. The calculation of the number of bits
set in a bitmap can be done using internal registers (in software) or combinatorial logic (in hardware).
Thus the effective slowdown is slightly more than a factor of 2 in software and exactly 2 in hardware.

Exercises

• How could you use table lookup (P14, P2a) to speed up counting the number of bits set in software?
  Would this necessarily require a third memory reference?
• Suppose the bitmap is large (say, M = 64 K). It would appear that counting the number of bits set
  in such a large bitmap is impossibly slow in hardware or software. Can you find a way to speed up
  counting bits in a large bitmap (principles P12 and P2a) using only one extra memory access? This
  will be extremely useful in Chapter 11.



4.7 Packet filtering in routers
Chapter 12 describes protocols that set up resources at routers for traffic, such as video, that needs
performance guarantees. Such protocols use the concept of packet filters, sometimes called classifiers.
Thus, in Fig. 4.12 each receiver attached to a router may specify a packet filter describing the packets
it wishes to receive. For example, in Fig. 4.12 Receiver 1 may be interested in receiving NBC, which is
specified by Filter 4. Each filter is some specification of the fields that describe the video packets that
NBC sends. For example, NBC may be specified by packets that use the source address of the NBC
transmitter in Germany and use a specified TCP destination and source port number.
    Similarly, in Fig. 4.12 Receiver m may be interested in receiving ABC Sports and CNN, which are
described by Filters 1 and 7, respectively. Packets arrive at the router at high speeds and must be sent
88        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.12
Packet filtering in a router may require a slow linear scan of all filters followed by making a copy of the packet for
all filters that match.


to all receivers that request the packet. For example, Receivers 1 and 2 may both wish to receive NBC.
This leads to the following problem.
Problem
Each receiving packet must be matched against all filters and sent to all receivers that match. A simple
linear scan of all filters is expensive if the number of filters is large. Assume the number of filters is
over a thousand. How can this expensive process be sped up?
Hint: One might think of optimizing the expected case by caching (P11a). However, why is caching
difficult in this case? Consider adding a field (P10) to the packet header to make caching easier.
Ideally, which protocol layer should this be added to? Adding a fixed well-known field for each
possible video type is not a panacea because it requires global standardization, and filters can be
based on other fields, such as the source address. Assume the field you add does not require globally
standardized identifiers. What properties of this field must the source ensure?

Solution
Caching (P11a), the old workhorse of system designers, is not very straightforward in this problem. In
general, a cache stores a mapping between an input a and some output f (a). The cache then consists
of a set of pairs of the form (a, f (a)). This set of pairs is stored as a database keyed by values of
a. The database can be implemented as a hash table (in software) or a content-addressable memory
(in hardware). Given input a and the need to calculate f (a), the database is first checked to see if
a is already in the database. If so, the fast path exits with the existing value of f (a). If not, f (a) is
computed using some other (possibly expensive) computation and the pair (a, f (a)) is then inserted
into the cache database. Subsequent inputs with value a can then be calculated very fast.
    In the packet filtering problem, the goal is to calculate the set of receivers associated with a packet
P . The problem is that the output is a function of a (potentially) large number of packet header fields
of P . Thus to use caching, one has to store a large portion of the headers of P associated with the set of
receivers for P . Storing a mapping between 64 bytes of packet header and an output set of receivers is
an expensive proposition. It is expensive in time, since searching the cache can take longer because the
                                                                    4.7 Packet filtering in routers       89




FIGURE 4.13
Adding a flow identifier (which is unique only with respect to a source) can speed up packet filtering.



keys are wide. It is also clearly expensive in storage. The larger storage needs in turn imply that fewer
mappings can be cached for a given cache size, which leads to a poorer cache hit rate.
    The ideal is to cache a mapping between one or two packet fields and the output receiver set. This
would speed up cache search time and improve the cache hit rate. These fields should also preferably
be in the routing header, which routers examine anyway. The problem is that there may be no such field
that uniquely fingerprints packet P .
    However, suppose we are system designers designing the routing protocol. We can add a field to
the routing header. The problem might seem trivial if we could assign each possible stream of packets
a unique global identifier. For example, if we could assign NBC identifier 1, ABC identifier 2, and
CNN identifier 3, then we could cache using the identifier as the key. Such a solution would require
some form of global standards committee responsible for naming every application stream. Even if that
could be done, the receiver filter might ask for all NBC packets from a given source, and the filter could
depend on other packet fields. This leads to the following final idea.
    Change the routing header to add a flow identifier F (Fig. 4.13), whose meaning depends on the
source. In other words, different sources can use the same flow identifier because it is the combination
of the source and the flow identifier that is unique. Thus there is no need for global standardization (or
other global coordination) of flow identifiers. A flow identifier is only a local counter maintained by the
source. The idea is that a sending application at the sender can ask the routing layer for a flow identifier.
This identifier is added to the routing header of all the packets for this application.
    As usual, when the application packet first arrives, the router does a (slow) linear search to deter-
mine the set of receivers associated with the packet header. Because identifiers are not unique across
sources, the router caches the mapping using the concatenation of the packet source address and the
flow identifier as the key. Clearly, correctness depends on the sender application’s not changing fields
that could affect a filter without also changing the flow identifier in the packet.
90        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.14
The LSP of router R1 (with even 500 endnode neighbors) may be too large to fit into a data link frame. Without a
clever idea, this would require inefficient fragmentation and reassembly of the LSP at every hop.



Exercises

• What can go wrong if the source crashes and comes up again without remembering which identifiers
  it has assigned to different applications? What can go wrong when a receiver adds a new filter? How
  can these problems be solved?
• In the current solution, the flow identifier is used as a tip (Chapter 3) and not as a hint. What addi-
  tional costs would be incurred if the flow identifier-source address pair is treated as a hint and not as
  a tip?



4.8 Avoiding fragmentation of LSPs
The following problem actually arose during the design of the OSI and OSPF (Perlman, 1992) link
state routing protocols. This problem is about protocol design, as opposed to protocol implementation
once the design is fixed. Despite this, it illustrates how design choices can greatly affect implementation
performance.
    Chapter 2 and Section 4.3 described link state routing. Recall that in link state routing, a router must
send an LSP listing all its neighbors. The link state protocol consists of two separate processes. The
first is the update process that sends LSPs reliably from router to router using a flooding protocol that
relies on a unique sequence number per LSP. The sequence number is used to reject duplicate copies
of an LSP. Whenever a router receives a new LSP numbered x from source S, the router will remember
number x and will reject any subsequent LSPs received from S with sequence number x. After the
update process does its work, the decision process at every router applies Dijkstra’s algorithm to the
network map formed by the LSPs.
    While a router may have a small number of router neighbors, a router may have a large number of
host computers (endnodes) that are connected directly to the router on the same LAN. For example,
in Fig. 4.14 router R1 has 500 endnode neighbors E1 . . . E500. Large LANs may even have a larger
number of endnodes. This leads to the following problem.
                                                      4.8 Avoiding fragmentation of LSPs               91



Problem
At 8 bytes per endnode (6 bytes to identify the endnode and 2 bytes of cost information), the LSP
can be very large (40,000 bytes for 5000 endnodes). This is much too huge for the LSP to fit into a
maximum-size frame on many commonly used data links. For example, Ethernet has a maximum size
of 1500 bytes and FDDI specifies a maximum of 4500 bytes. This implies that the large LSP must be
fragmented into many data link frames on each hop and reassembled at each router before it can be sent
onward. This requires an expensive reassembly process at each hop to determine whether all the pieces
of a LSP have been received.
    It also increases the latency of link state propagation. Suppose that each LSP can fit in M data link
frames, that the diameter of the network is D, and that the time to send a data link frame over a link is 1
time unit. Then with hop-by-hop reassembly, the propagation time of an LSP can be D · M. If a router
did not have to wait to reassemble each LSP at each hop, the propagation delay would be only M + D.
When the link state protocol was being designed, these problems were discovered by implementors
reviewing the initial specification.
    On the other hand, it seems impossible to propagate the fragments independently because the LSP
carries a single sequence number that is crucial to the update process. Simply copying the sequence
number into each fragment will not help because that will cause the later fragments to be rejected,
since they have the same sequence number as the first fragment. The problem is to make the impossible
possible by shifting computation around in space to avoid the need for hop-by-hop fragmentation.
Changes to the LSP routing protocol are allowed.
Hint: Does the information about all 5000 endnodes have to be in the same LSP? Consider invoking
P3c to shift computation in space.

Solution
If the individual fragments of the original LSP of R1 are to be propagated independently without hop-
by-hop reassembly, then each fragment must be a separate LSP by itself, with a separate sequence
number. This crucial observation leads to the following elegant idea.
    Modify the link state routing protocol to allow any router R1 to be multiple pseudorouters R1a ,
R1b , R1c (see Fig. 4.15). The original set of endnodes are divided among these pseudorouters, so the
LSP of each pseudorouter can fit into most data link frames without the need for fragmentation. For
example, if most data link sizes are at least 576 bytes, roughly 72 endnodes can fit within a data link
frame.
    How is this concept of a pseudorouter actually realized? In the original LSP propagation, each
router had a 6-byte ID that is placed in all LSPs sent by the router. To allow for pseudorouters, we
change the protocol to have LSPs carry a 7-byte ID (6-byte router ID + 1-byte pseudorouter ID). The
pseudorouter ID can be assigned by the actual router that houses all the pseudorouters. By allowing 256
pseudorouters per router, roughly 18,000 endnodes can be supported per router.
    While the LSP propagation treats pseudorouters separately, it is crucial that route computation treat
the separate pseudorouters as one router. After all, the endnodes are all directly connected to R1 in our
example. But this is easily done because all the LSPs with the same first 6 bytes can be recognized as
being from the same router.
    In summary, the main idea is to shift computation in space (P3c) by having the source fragment the
original LSP into independent LSPs instead of having each data link do the fragmentation. This is a
