                                                                     2.3 Network device architectures                         33



that involve off- and on-chip memory. However, given that chip densities and power constraints limit
parallelism to, say, a factor of at most 60, the bottom line is that all packet-processing functions at high
speeds must complete using at most 200 memory accesses and limited on-chip memory.8 Despite these
limitations, a rich variety of packet-processing functions have been implemented at high speeds.



2.3 Network device architectures
Optimizing network performance requires optimizing the path of data through the internals of the
source node, the sink node, and every router. Thus it is important to understand the internal archi-
tecture of endnodes and routers. The earlier part of this chapter argued that logic and memory can
be combined to form state machines. In essence, both routers and endnodes are state machines. How-
ever, their architectures are optimized for different purposes: endnode architectures (Section 2.3.1) for
general computation and router architectures (Section 2.3.2) for Internet communication.


2.3.1 Endnode architecture
A processor such as a Pentium is a state machine that takes a sequence of instructions and data as
input and writes output to I/O devices, such as printers and terminals. To allow programs that have a
large state space, the bulk of the processor state is stored externally in cheap DRAM. In PCs, this is
referred to as main memory and is often implemented using 1 GB or more of interleaved DRAM, such
as SDRAM. However, recall that DRAM access times are large, say, 60 nsec. If the processor state
were stored only in DRAM, an instruction would take 60 nsec to read or write to memory.
    Processors gain speed using caches, which are comparatively small chunks of SRAM that can store
commonly used pieces of state for faster access. Some SRAM (i.e., the L1 cache) is placed on the
processor chip, and some more SRAM (i.e., the L2 cache) is placed external to the processor. A cache
is a hash table that maps between memory address locations and contents. CPU caches use a simple
hash function: They extract some bits from the address to index into an array and then search in parallel
for all the addresses that map into the array element.9 When a memory location has to be read from
DRAM, it is placed in the cache, and an existing cache element may be evicted. Commonly used data
is stored in a data cache, and commonly used instructions in an instruction cache.
    Caching works well if the instructions and data exhibit temporal locality (i.e., the corresponding
location is reused frequently in a small time period) or spatial locality (i.e., accessing a location is
followed by access to a nearby location). Spatial locality is taken advantage of as follows. Recall that
accessing a DRAM location involves accessing a row R and then a column within the row. Thus reading
words within row R are cheaper after R is accessed. A Pentium takes advantage of this observation by
prefetching 128 (cache line size) contiguous bits into the cache whenever 32 bits of data are accessed.
Access to the adjoining 96 bits will not incur a cache miss penalty.


8 Of course, there are ways to work around these limits, for instance, by using multiple chips, but such implementations often
do badly in terms of cost, complexity, and power consumption.
9 The number of elements that can be searched in parallel in a hash bucket is called the associativity of the cache. While
router designers rightly consider bit extraction to be a poor hash function, the addition of associativity improves overall hashing
performance, especially on computing workloads.
34       Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.8
Model of a workstation.


    Many computing benchmarks exhibit temporal and spatial locality; however, a stream of packets
probably exhibits only spatial locality. Thus improving endnode protocol implementations often re-
quires paying attention to cache effects.
    The foregoing discussion should set the stage for the endnode architecture model shown in Fig. 2.8.
The processor, or CPU—e.g., a Pentium or an Alpha—sits on a bus. A bus can be thought of as a
network like an Ethernet, but optimized for the fact that the devices on the bus are close to each other.
The processor interacts with other components by sending messages across the bus.
    The input–output (I/O) devices are typically memory mapped. In other words, even I/O devices like
the network adaptor and the disk look like pieces of memory. For example, the adaptor memory may
be mapped to 100–200 in the memory address space. This allows uniform communication between
the CPU and any device by using the same conventions used to interact with memory. In terms of
networking, a Read (or Write) can be thought of as a message sent on the bus addressed to the memory
location. Thus a Read 100 is sent on the bus, and the device that owns memory location 100 (e.g., the
adaptor) will receive the message and reply with the contents of location 100.
    Modern machines allow direct memory access (DMA), where devices such as the disk or the net-
work adaptor send Reads and Writes directly to the memory via the bus without processor intervention.
However, only one entity can use the bus at a time. Thus the adaptor has to contend for the bus; any
device that gets hold of the bus “steals cycles” from the processor. This is because the processor is
forced to wait to access memory while a device is sending messages across the bus.
    In Fig. 2.8, also notice that the adaptor actually sits on a different bus (system bus or memory bus)
from the bus on which the network adaptor and other peripherals (I/O bus) sit. The memory bus is
designed for speed and is redesigned for every new processor; the I/O bus is a standard bus (e.g., a PCI
bus) chosen to stay compatible with older I/O devices. Thus the I/O bus is typically slower than the
memory bus.
    A big lesson for networking in Fig. 2.8 is that the throughput of a networking application is crucially
limited by the speed of the slowest bus, typically the I/O bus. Worse, the need for extra copies to
preserve operating system structure causes every packet received or sent by a workstation to traverse
the bus multiple times. Techniques to avoid redundant bus traversals are described in Chapter 5.
    Modern processors are heavily pipelined with instruction fetch, instruction decode, data reads, and
data writes split into separate stages. Superscalar and multithreaded machines go beyond pipelining
                                                             2.3 Network device architectures                   35




FIGURE 2.9
Using parallel connections within an endnode architecture to allow concurrent processing and network traffic via a
parallel switch.



by issuing multiple instructions concurrently. While these innovations (see, for example, the classic
reference on endnode architecture [Hennessey and Patterson, 1996]) remove computation bottlenecks,
they do little for data-movement bottlenecks. Consider the following speculative architecture instead.

Example 6. Endnode Architecture Using a Crossbar Switch: Fig. 2.9 shows the endnode bus being
replaced by a programmable hardware switch, as is commonly used by routers. The switch internally
contains a number of parallel buses so that any set of disjoint endpoint pairs can be connected in parallel
by the switch. Thus in the figure, the processor is connected to Memory 1, while the network adaptor is
connected to Memory 2. Thus packets from the network can be placed in Memory 2 without interfering
with the processor’s reading from Memory 1. If the processor now wishes to read the incoming packet,
the switch can be reprogrammed to connect the processor to Memory 2 and the adaptor to Memory 1.
This can work well if the queue of empty packet buffers used by the adaptor alternates between the two
memories.
    There are recent proposals for Infiniband switch technology to replace the I/O bus in processors
(Chapter 5). The ultimate message of this example is not that architectures such as Fig. 2.9 are nec-
essarily good but that simple architectural idea to improve network performance, such as Fig. 2.9,
are not hard for even protocol designers to conceive, given simple models of hardware and architec-
ture.


2.3.2 Router architecture
A router model that covers both high-end routers (such as Juniper’s M-series routers) and low-end
routers (such as the Cisco Catalyst) is shown in Fig. 2.10. Basically, a router is a box with a set of input
links, shown on the left, and a set of output links, shown on the right; the task of the router is to switch
a packet from an input link to the appropriate output link based on the destination address in the packet.
While the input and output links are shown separately, the two links in each direction between two
routers are often packaged together. We review three main bottlenecks in a router: lookup, switching,
and output queuing.
36        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.10
A model of a router labeled with the three main bottlenecks in the forwarding path: address lookup (B1), switching
(B2), and output scheduling (B3).


Lookup
A packet arrives on, say, the left link, input link i. Every packet carries a 32-bit Internet Protocol (IP)
address.10 Assume that the first six bits of the destination address of a sample packet are 100100. A
processor in the router inspects the destination address to determine where to forward the packet.
    The processor consults a forwarding table to determine the output link for the packet. The forward-
ing table is sometimes called a FIB, for forwarding information base. The FIB contains a set of prefixes
with corresponding output links. The reason for prefixes will be explained in Chapter 11; for now, think
of prefixes as variable-length “area codes” that greatly reduce the FIB size. A prefix like 01*, where the
* denotes the usual “don’t care” symbol, matches IP addresses that start with 01. Assume that prefix
100* has associated output link 6, while prefix 1* has output link 2. Thus our sample packet, whose
destination address starts with 100100, matches both prefixes 100* and 1*. The disambiguating rule
that IP routers use is to match an address to the longest matching prefix. Assuming no longer matching
prefixes, our sample packet should be forwarded to output link 6.
    The processor that does the lookup and basic packet processing can be either shared or dedicated
and can be either a general processor or a special-purpose chip. Early router designs used a shared
processor (or processors), but this proved to be a bottleneck. Later designs, including Cisco’s GSR
family, use a dedicated processor per input link interface. The earliest designs used a standard CPU
processor, but many of the fastest routers today, such as Juniper’s M-160, use a dedicated chip (ASIC)
with some degree of programmability. There has been a backlash to this trend toward ASICs, however,
with customers asking routers to perform new functions, such as Web load balancing. Thus some new
routers use network processors (see Example 7), which are general-purpose processors optimized for
networking.


10 Recall that while most users deal with domain names, these names are translated to an IP address by a directory service,
called DNS, before packets are sent.
                                                                     2.3 Network device architectures                         37



    Algorithms for prefix lookups are described in Chapter 11. Many routers today also offer a more
complex lookup called packet classification (Chapter 12), where the lookup takes as input the destina-
tion address as well as source address and TCP ports.

Switching
After address lookup in the example of Fig. 2.10, the processor instructs an internal switching system
to transfer the packet from link i to output link 6. In older processors, the switch was a simple bus,
such as shown in Fig. 2.8. This proved to be a major bottleneck because, if the switch has N input links
running at B bits per second, the bus would have to have a bandwidth of B · N . Unfortunately, as N
increases, electrical effects (such as the capacitive load of a bus) predominate, limiting the bus speed.
    Thus the fastest routers today internally use a parallel switch of the sort shown in Fig. 2.9. The
throughput of the switch is increased by using N parallel buses, one for each input and one for each
output. An input and an output are connected by turning on transistors connecting the corresponding
input bus and output bus. While it is easy to build the data path, it is harder to schedule the switch, be-
cause multiple inputs may wish to send to the same output link at the same time. The switch-scheduling
problem boils down to matching available inputs and outputs every packet arrival time. Algorithms for
this purpose are described in Chapter 13.

Queuing
Once the packet in Fig. 2.10 has been looked up and switched to output link 6, output link 6 may be
congested, and thus the packet may have to be placed in a queue for output link 6. Many older routers
simply place the packet in a first-in-first-out (FIFO) transmission queue. However, some routers employ
more sophisticated output scheduling to provide fair bandwidth allocation and delay guarantees. Output
scheduling is described in Chapter 14.
    Besides the major tasks of lookups, switching, and queuing, there are a number of other tasks that
are less time-critical.

Header validation and checksums
The version number of a packet is checked, and the header-length field is checked for options. Options
are additional processing directives that are rarely used; such packets are often shunted to a separate
route processor. The header also has a simple checksum that must be verified. Finally, a time-to-live
(TTL) field must be decremented and the header checksum recalculated. Chapter 9 shows how to
incrementally update the checksum. Header validation and checksum computation are often done in
hardware.

Route processing
Section A.1.2 describes briefly how routers build forwarding tables using routing protocols. Routers
within domains implement RIP and OSPF, while routers that link domains also must implement BGP.11


11 It is possible to buy versions of these protocols, but the software must be customized for each new hardware platform. A more
insidious problem, especially with BGP and OSPF, is that many of the first implementations of these protocols vary in subtle
ways from the actual specifications. Thus a new implementation that meets the specification may not interoperate with existing
routers. Thus ISPs are reluctant to buy new routers unless they can trust the “quality” of the BGP code, in terms of its ability to
interoperate with existing routers.
38         Chapter 2 Network implementation models



These protocols are implemented in one or more route processors. For example, when a LSP is sent
to the router in Fig. 2.10, lookup will recognize that this is a packet destined for the router itself and
will cause the packet to be switched to the route processor. The route processor maintains the link-state
database and computes shortest paths; after computation, the route processor loads the new forwarding
databases in each of the forwarding processors through either the switch or a separate out-of-band path.
    In the early days, Cisco won its spurs by processing not just Internet packets but also other routing
protocols, such as DECNET, SNA, and AppleTalk. The need for such multiprotocol processing is less
clear now. A much more important trend is multi-protocol-label switching (MPLS), which appears to
be de rigeur for core routers. In MPLS, the IP header is augmented with a header containing simple
integer indices that can be looked up directly without a prefix lookup; Chapter 11 provides more details
about MPLS.

Protocol processing
All routers today have to implement the simple network management protocol (SNMP) and provide a
set of counters that can be inspected remotely. To allow remote communication with the router, most
routers also implement TCP and UDP. In addition, routers have to implement the Internet control mes-
sage protocol (ICMP), which is basically a protocol for sending error messages, such as “time-to-live
exceeded.”

Fragmentation, redirects, and ARPs
While it is clear that route and protocol processing is best relegated to a route processor on a so-called
“slow path,” there are a few router functions that are more ambiguous. For example, if a packet of 3000
bytes is to be sent over a link with a maximum packet size (MTU) of 1500 bytes, the packet has to
be fragmented into two pieces.12 While the prevailing trend is for sources, instead of routers, to do
fragmentation, some routers do fragmentation in the fast path. Another such function is the sending of
Redirects. If an endnode sends a message to the wrong router, the router is supposed to send a Redirect
back to the endnode. A third such function is the sending of address resolution protocol (ARP) requests,
whose operation is explored in the exercises.
    Finally, routers today have a number of other tasks they may be called on to perform. Many routers
within enterprises do content-based handling of packets, where the packet processing depends on
strings found in the packet data. For example, a router that fronts a Web farm of many servers may
wish to forward packets with the same Web URL to the same Web server. There are also the issues of
accounting and traffic measurement. Some of these new services are described in Chapter 16.
Example 7. Network Processors: Network processors are general-purpose programmable processors
optimized for network traffic. Their proponents say that they are needed because the unpredictable
nature of router tasks (such as content-based delivery) makes committing router forwarding to silicon a
risky proposition. For example, the Intel IXP1200 network processor evaluated in Spalink et al. (2000)
internally contains six processors, each running at 177 MHz with a 5.6-nsec clock cycle. Each processor
receives packets from an input queue; packets are stored in a large DRAM; after the processor has
looked up the packet destination, the packet is placed on the output queue with a tag describing the
output link it should be forwarded to.


12 Strictly speaking, since each fragment adds headers, there will be three pieces.
                                                                    2.4 Operating systems              39



    The biggest problem is that the processors are responsible for moving packets in and out of DRAM.
In the IXP1200, moving 32 bytes from the queue to the DRAM takes 45 clock cycles, and moving from
the DRAM to the queue takes 55 cycles. Since a minimum-size packet is at least 40 bytes, this requires
a total of 200 cycles = 1.12 usec, which translates to a forwarding rate of only around 900 K pack-
ets/second. The IXP1200 gets around this limit by using six parallel processors and an old architectural
idea called multithreading. The main idea is that each processor works on multiple packets, each packet
being a thread; when the processing for one packet stalls because of a memory reference, processing
for the next thread is resumed. Using fast context switching between threads, and four contexts per
processor, the IXP1200 can theoretically obtain 6 * 4 * 900 K = 21.6 M packets/second.
    Network processors also offer special-purpose instructions for address lookup and other common
forwarding functions. Some network processors also streamline the movement of data packets by hav-
ing hardware engines that present only the header of each data packet to the processor. The remainder
of the data packet flows directly to the output queue. The processor(s) read the header, do the lookup,
and write the updated header to the output queue. The hardware magically glues together the updated
header with the original packet and keeps all packets in order. While this approach avoids the move-
ment of the remainder of the packet through the processor, it does nothing for the case of minimum-size
packets.

                            Case Study 2: Buffering and optical switching
      As fiber-optic links scale to higher speeds, electronics implementing combinational logic and
  memories in core routers becomes a bottleneck. Currently, packets arrive over fiber-optic links
  with each bit encoded as a light pulse. Optics at the receiver convert light to electrical pulses; the
  packet is then presented to forwarding logic implemented electronically. The packet is then queued
  to an outbound link for transmission, upon which the transmitting link optics convert electrical
  bits back to light. The electronic bottleneck can be circumvented by creating an all-optical router
  without any electro-optical conversions.
      Unfortunately, doing IP lookups optically, and especially building dense optical packet mem-
  ories, seems hard today. But switching light between several endpoints is feasible. Thus the
  numerous start-ups in the buzzing optical space tend to build optical circuit switches that use
  electronics to set up the circuit switch. A circuit switch connects input X to output Y for a large
  duration, as opposed to the duration of a single packet as in a packet switch. Such circuit switches
  have found use as a flexible “core” of an ISP’s network to connect conventional routers. If traf-
  fic between, say, routers R1 and R2 increases, an ISP operator can (at a large time scale of, say,
  minutes) change the circuit switches to increase the bandwidth of the R1-to-R2 path. However,
  the wastefulness of reserving switch paths for small flow durations makes it likely that packet-
  switched routers will continue to be popular in the near future.




2.4 Operating systems
An operating system is a software that sits above hardware in order to make life easier for application
programmers. For most Internet routers, time-critical packet forwarding runs directly on the hardware
(Fig. 2.10) and is not mediated by an operating system. Less time-critical code runs on a router oper-
40        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.11
The programmer sees the illusion of an uninterrupted timeline shown above, while the real processor timeline may
switch back and forth between several processes.


ating system that is stripped down, such as Cisco’s IOS. However, to improve end-to-end performance
for, say, Web browsing, an implementor needs to understand the costs and benefits of operating systems.
    Abstractions are idealizations or illusions we invent to deal with the perversity and irregularity of
the real world. To finesse the difficulties of programming on a bare machine, operating systems offer
abstractions to application programmers. Three central difficulties of dealing with raw hardware are
dealing with interruptions, managing memory, and controlling I/O devices. To deal with these diffi-
culties, operating systems offer the abstractions of uninterrupted computation, infinite memory, and
simple I/O.
    A good abstraction increases programmer productivity but has two costs. First, the mechanism im-
plementing the abstraction has a price. For example, scheduling processes can cause overhead for a Web
server. A second, less obvious cost is that the abstraction can hide power, preventing the programmer
from making optimal use of resources. For example, operating system memory management may pre-
vent the programmer of an Internet lookup algorithm from keeping the lookup data structure in memory
in order to maximize performance. We now provide a model of the costs and underlying mechanisms of
the process (Section 2.4.1), virtual memory (Section 2.4.2), and I/O (Section 2.4.3) abstractions. More
details can be found in Tanenbaum (1992).


2.4.1 Uninterrupted computation via processes
A program may not run very long on the processor before being interrupted by the network adaptor.
If application programmers had to deal with interrupts, a working 100-line program would be a mir-
acle. Thus operating systems provide programmers with the abstraction of uninterrupted, sequential
computation under the name of a process.
    The process abstraction is realized by three mechanisms: context switching, scheduling, and protec-
tion, the first two of which are depicted in Fig. 2.11. In Fig. 2.11, Process P1 has the illusion that it runs
on the processor by itself. In reality, as shown on the timeline below, Process P1 may be interrupted by a
timer interrupt, which causes the OS scheduler program to run on the processor. Displacing P1 requires
the operating system to save the state of P1 in memory. The scheduler may run briefly and decide to give
Process P2 a turn. Restoring P2 to run on the processor requires restoring the state of P2 from memory.
Thus the actual time line of a processor may involve frequent context switches between processes, as
orchestrated by the scheduler. Finally, protection ensures that incorrect or malicious behavior of one
process cannot affect other processes.
    As agents of computation, “processes” come in three flavors—interrupt handlers, threads, and user
processes—ranked in order of increasing generality and cost. Interrupt handlers are small pieces of
                                                                           2.4 Operating systems                  41




FIGURE 2.12
The processing of a received Internet packet in BSD is divided between the network adaptor, the kernel, and the
destined process.


computation used to service urgent requests, such as the arrival of a message to the network adaptor;
interrupt handlers use only a small amount of state, typically a few registers. User processes use the
complete state of the machine, such as memory as well as registers; thus, it is expensive to switch
between user processes as directed by the scheduler. Within the context of a single process, threads offer
a cheaper alternative to processes. A thread is a lightweight process that requires less state, because
threads within the same process share the same memory (i.e., same variables). Thus context switching
between two threads in the same process is cheaper than switching processes, because memory does
not have to be remapped. The following example shows the relevance of these concepts to endnode
networking.
Example 8. Receiver Livelock in BSD Unix: In BSD UNIX, as shown in Fig. 2.12, the arrival of a
packet generates an interrupt. The interrupt is a hardware signal that causes the processor to save the
state of the currently running process, say, a Java program. The processor then jumps to the interrupt
handler code, bypassing the scheduler for speed. The interrupt handler copies the packet to a kernel
queue of IP packets waiting to be consumed, makes a request for an operating system thread (called a
software interrupt), and exits. Assuming no further interrupts, the interrupt exit passes control to the
scheduler, which is likely to cede the processor to the software interrupt, which has higher priority than
user processes.
    The kernel thread does TCP and IP processing and queues the packet to the appropriate application
queue, called a socket queue (Fig. 2.12). Assume that the application is a browser such as Netscape.
Netscape runs as a process that may have been asleep waiting for data and is now considered for being
run on the processor by the scheduler. After the software interrupt exits and control passes back to the
scheduler, the scheduler may decide to run Netscape in place of the original Java program.
42        Chapter 2 Network implementation models



    Under high network load, the computer can enter what is called receiver livelock (Mogul and Ra-
makrishnan, 1997), in which the computer spends all its time processing incoming packets, only to
discard them later because the applications never run. In our example, if there is a series of back-to-
back packet arrivals, only the highest-priority interrupt handler will run, possibly leaving no time for
the software interrupt and certainly leaving none for the browser process. Thus either the IP or socket
queues will fill up, causing packets to be dropped after resources have been invested in their processing.
Methods to mitigate this effect are described in Chapter 6.
    Notice also that the latency and throughput of network code in an endnode depend on “process”
activation times. For example, current figures for Pentium IV machines show around 2 µsec of interrupt
latency for a null interrupt call, around 10 µsec for a Process Context switch on a Linux machine
with two processes, and much more time for Windows and Solaris on the same machine. These times
may seem small, but recall that 30 minimum-size (40-byte) packets can arrive in 10 µsec on a Gigabit
Ethernet link.



2.4.2 Infinite memory via virtual memory
In virtual memory (Fig. 2.13), the programmer works with an abstraction of memory that is a linear
array into which a compiler assigns variable locations. Variable X could be stored in location 1010 in
this imaginary (or virtual) array. The virtual memory abstraction is implemented using the twin mech-




FIGURE 2.13
The programmer sees the illusion of contiguous virtual memory, which is, in reality, mapped to a collection of main
memory and disk memory pages via page tables.
                                                                    2.4 Operating systems             43



anisms of page table mapping and demand paging. Both these mechanisms are crucial to understand in
order to optimize data transfer costs in an endnode.
    Any virtual address must be mapped to a physical memory address. The easiest mapping is to use
an offset into physical memory. For example, a virtual array of 15,000 locations could be mapped into
physical memory from, say, 12,000 to 27,000. This has two disadvantages. First, when the program
runs, a block of 15,000 contiguous locations has to be found. Second, the programmer is limited to
using a total memory equal to the size of physical memory.
    Both problems can be avoided by a mapping based on table lookup. Since it takes too much memory
to implement a mapping from any virtual location to any physical location, a more restricted mapping
based on pages is used. Thus for any virtual address, let us say that the high-order bits (e.g., 20 bits)
form the page number and that the low-order bits (e.g., 12 bits) form the location within a page. All
locations within a virtual page are mapped to the same relative location, but individual virtual pages
can be mapped to arbitrary locations. Main memory is also divided into physical pages, such that every
group of 212 memory words is a physical page.
    To map a virtual into a physical address, the corresponding virtual page (i.e., high-order 20 bits) is
mapped to a physical page number while retaining the same location within the page. The mapping is
done by looking up a page table indexed by the virtual page number. A virtual page can be located on
any physical memory page. More generally, some pages (e.g., Virtual Page 2 in Fig. 2.13) may not be
memory resident and can be marked as being on disk. When such a page is accessed, the hardware will
generate an exception and cause the operating system to read the page from the disk page into a main
memory page. This second mechanism is called demand paging.
    Together, page mapping and demand paging solve the two problems of storage allocation and
bounded memory allocations. Instead of solving the harder variable size storage allocation problem,
the OS needs only to keep a list of fixed size free pages and to assign some free pages to a new pro-
gram. Also, the programmer can work with an abstraction of memory whose size is bounded only by
the size of the disk and the number of instruction address bits.
    The extra mapping can slow down each instruction considerably. A Read to virtual location X may
require two main memory accesses: a page table access to translate X to physical address P , followed
by a Read to address P . Modern processors get around this overhead by caching the most recently used
mappings between virtual and physical addresses in a translation look-aside buffer (TLB), which is
a processor-resident cache. The actual translation is done by a piece of hardware called the memory
management unit (MMU), as shown in Fig. 2.8.
    The page table mapping also provides a mechanism for protection between processes. When a
process makes a Read to virtual location X, unless there is a corresponding entry in the page table, the
hardware will generate a page fault exception. By ensuring that only the operating system can change
page table entries, the operating system can ensure that one process cannot read from or write to the
memory of another process in an unauthorized fashion.
    While router forwarding works directly on physical memory, all endnode and server networking
code works on virtual memory. While virtual memory is a potential cost (e.g., for TLB misses), it
also reflects a possible opportunity. For example, it offers the potential for packet copying between the
operating system and the application (see Example 8) to be done more efficiently by manipulating page
tables. This idea is explored further in Chapter 5.
