             3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description                                       63



replace the operating system caching routines with more specialized routines. It is best to do such spe-
cialization only for key routines, to avoid code bloat. A networking example is the fast UDP processing
routines that we describe in Chapter 9.

P7: Avoid unnecessary generality
The tendency to design abstract and general subsystems can also lead to unnecessary or rarely used
features. Thus, rather than building several specialized routines (e.g., P6) to replace the general-purpose
routine, we might remove features to gain performance.4
    Of course, as in the case of P3, removing features requires users of the routine to live with re-
strictions. For example, in RISC processors, the elimination of complex instructions such as multiplies
required multiplication to be emulated by firmware. A networking example is provided by Fbufs (Chap-
ter 5), which provides a specialized virtual memory service that allows efficient copying between virtual
address spaces.

P8: Don’t be tied to reference implementations
Specifications are written for clarity, not to suggest efficient implementations. Because abstract speci-
fication languages are unpopular, many specifications use imperative languages such as C. Rather than
precisely describe what function is to be computed, one gets code that prescribes how to compute the
function. This has two side effects.
    First, there is a strong tendency to overspecify. Second, many implementors copy the reference
implementation in the specification, which is a problem when the reference implementation was chosen
for conceptual clarity and not efficiency. As Clark (1985) points out, implementors are free to change
the reference implementation as long as the two implementations have the same external effects. In
fact, there may be other structured implementations that are efficient as well as modular.
    For example, Charlie knows that when a recipe tells him to cut beans and then to cut carrots, he can
interchange the two steps. In the systems world, Clark originally suggested the use of upcalls (Clark,
1985) for operating systems. In an upcall, a lower layer can call an upper layer for data or advice, seem-
ingly violating the rules of hierarchical decomposition introduced in the design of operating systems.
Upcalls are commonly used today in network protocol implementations.

P9: Pass hints in module interfaces
A hint is information passed from a client to a service that, if correct, can avoid expensive computation
by the service. The two key phrases are passed and if correct. By passing the hint in its request, a
service can avoid the need for the associative lookup needed to access a cache. For example, a hint can
be used to supply a direct index into the processing state at the receiver. Also, unlike caches, the hint is
not guaranteed to be correct and hence must be checked against other certifiably correct information.
Hints improve performance if the hint is correct most of the time.
    This definition of a hint suggests a variant in which information is passed that is guaranteed to be
correct and hence requires no checking. For want of an established term, we will call such information
a tip. Tips are harder to use because of the need to ensure the correctness of the tip.


4 Butler Lampson, a computer scientist and Turing Award winner, provides two quotes: When in doubt, get rid of it (anonymous)
and Exterminate Features (Thacker).
64       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



    As a systems example, the Alto File system (Lampson, 1989) has every file block on disk carry a
pointer to the next file block. This pointer is treated as only a hint and is checked against the file name
and block number stored in the block itself. If the hint is incorrect, the information can be reconstructed
from disk. Incorrect hints must not jeopardize system correctness but result only in performance degra-
dation.

P10: Pass hints in protocol headers
For distributed systems, the logical extension to Principle P9 is to pass information such as hints in
message headers. Since this book deals with distributed systems, we will make this a separate principle.
For example, computer architects have applied this principle to circumvent inefficiencies in message-
passing parallel systems such as the Connection Machine.
    One of the ideas in active messages (Chapter 5) is to have a message carry the address of the
interrupt handler for fast dispatching. Another example is tag switching (Chapter 11), where packets
carry additional indices besides the destination address to help the destination address to be looked up
quickly. Tags are used as hints because tag consistency is not guaranteed; packets can be routed to the
wrong destination, where they must be checked.


3.3.3 Principles for speeding up routines
While the previous principles exploited system structure, we now consider principles for speeding up
system routines considered in isolation.

P11: Optimize the expected case
While systems can exhibit a range of behaviors, the behaviors often fall into a smaller set called the
“expected case” (Hennessey and Patterson, 1996). For example, well-designed systems should mostly
operate in a fault- and exception-free regime. A second example is a program that exhibits spatial
locality by mostly accessing a small set of memory locations. Thus it pays to make common behaviors
efficient, even at the cost of making uncommon behaviors more expensive.
    Heuristics such as optimizing the expected case are often unsatisfying for theoreticians, who (natu-
rally) prefer mechanisms whose benefit can be precisely quantified in an average or worst-case sense.
In defense of this heuristic, note that every computer in existence optimizes the expected case (see
Chapter 2) at least a million times a second.
    For example, with the use of paging, the worst-case number of memory references to resolve a
PC instruction that accesses memory can be as bad as four (read instruction from memory, read first-
level page table, read second-level page table, fetch operand from memory). However, the number of
memory accesses can be reduced to 0 using caches. In general, caches allow designers to use modular
structures and indirection, with gains in flexibility, and yet regain performance in the expected case.
Thus it is worth highlighting caching.

P11a: Use caches
Besides caching, there are subtler uses of the expected-case principle. For example, when you wish to
change buffers in the EMACS editor, the editor offers you a default buffer name, which is the last buffer
you examined. This saves typing time in the expected case when you keep moving between two buffers.
The use of header prediction (Chapter 9) in networks is another example of optimizing the expected
           3.3 Fifteen implementation principles—categorization and description                       65



case: The cost of processing a packet can be greatly reduced by assuming that the next packet received
is closely related to the last packet processed (for example, by being the next packet in sequence) and
requires no exception processing.
    Note that determining the common case is best done by measurements and by schemes that auto-
matically learn the common case. However, it is often based on the designer’s intuition. Note that the
expected case may be incorrect in special situations or may change with time.

P12: Add or exploit state to gain speed
If an operation is expensive, consider maintaining additional but redundant state to speed up the op-
eration. For example, Charlie keeps track of the tables that are busy so that he can optimize waiter
assignments. This is not absolutely necessary, for he can always compute this information when needed
by walking around the restaurant.
    In database systems, a classic example is the use of secondary indices. Bank records may be stored
and searched using a primary key, say, the customer’s Social Security number. However, if there are
several queries that reference the customer name (e.g., “Find the balance of all Cleopatra’s accounts in
the Thebes branch”), it may pay to maintain an additional index (e.g., a hash table or B-tree) on the
customer name. Note that maintaining additional state implies the need to potentially modify this state
whenever changes occur.
    However, sometimes this principle can be used without adding state by exploiting the existing state.
We call this out as Principle P12a.

P12a: Compute incrementally
When a new customer comes in or leaves, Charlie increments the board on which he notes waiter
assignments. As a second example, strength reduction in compilers (see example in P4c) incrementally
computes the new loop index from the old using additions instead of computing the absolute index using
multiplication. An example of incremental computation in networking is the incremental computation
of IP checksums (Chapter 9) when only a few fields in the packet change.

P13: Optimize degrees of freedom
It helps to be aware of the variables that are under one’s control and the evaluation criteria used to
determine good performance. Then the game becomes one of optimizing these variables to maximize
performance. For example, Charlie first used to assign waiters to tables as they became free, but he
realized he could improve waiter efficiency by assigning each waiter to a set of contiguous tables.
    Similarly, compilers use coloring algorithms to do register assignment while minimizing register
spills. A networking example of optimizing degrees of freedom is multibit trie IP lookup algorithms
(Chapter 11). In this example, a degree of freedom that can be overlooked is that the number of bits
used to index into a trie node can vary, depending on the path through the trie, as opposed to being fixed
at each level. The number of bits used can also be optimized via dynamic programming (Chapter 11)
to demand the smallest amount of memory for a given speed requirement.

P14: Use special techniques for finite universes such as integers
When dealing with small universes, such as moderately sized integers, techniques like bucket sorting,
array lookup, and bitmaps are often more efficient than general-purpose sorting and searching algo-
rithms.
66         Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



    To translate a virtual address into a physical address, a processor first tries a cache called the TLB.
If this fails, the processor must look up the page table. A prefix of the address bits is used to index into
the page table directly. The use of table lookup avoids the use of hash tables or binary search, but it
requires large page table sizes. A networking example of this technique is timing wheels (Chapter 7),
where an efficient algorithm for a fixed timer range is constructed using a circular array.

P15: Use algorithmic techniques to create efficient data structures
Even where there are major bottlenecks, such as virtual address translation, systems designers finesse
the need for clever algorithms by passing hints, using caches, and performing table lookup. Thus a
major system designer is reported to have told an eager theoretician: “I don’t use algorithms, son.”
    This book does not take this somewhat antiintellectual position. Instead, it contends that, in context,
efficient algorithms can greatly improve system performance. In fact, a fair portion of the book will be
spent describing such examples. However, there is a solid kernel of truth to the “I don’t use algorithms”
putdown. In many cases, Principles P1 through P14 need to be applied before any algorithmic issues
become bottlenecks.
    Algorithmic approaches include the use of standard data structures as well as generic algorithmic
techniques, such as divide-and-conquer and randomization. The algorithm designer must, however, be
prepared to see his clever algorithm become obsolete because of changes in system structure and tech-
nology. As described in the introduction, the real breakthroughs may arise from applying algorithmic
thinking as opposed to merely reusing existing algorithms.
    Examples of the successful use of algorithms in computer systems are the Lempel–Ziv compression
algorithm employed in the UNIX utility gzip, the Rabin–Miller primality test algorithm found in public
key systems, and the common use of B-trees (due to Bayer–McCreight) in databases (Cormen et al.,
1990). Networking examples studied in this text include the Lulea IP-lookup algorithm (Chapter 11)
and the RFC scheme for packet classification (Chapter 12).



3.4 Design versus implementation principles
Now that we have listed the principles used in this book, three clarifications are needed. First, con-
scious use of general principles does not eliminate creativity and effort but instead channels them more
efficiently. Second, the list of principles is necessarily incomplete and can probably be categorized in a
different way; however, it is a good place to start.
    Third, it is important to clarify the difference between system design and implementation principles.
Systems designers have articulated principles for system design. Design principles include, for exam-
ple, the use of hierarchies and aggregation for scaling (e.g., IP prefixes), adding a level of indirection for
increased flexibility (e.g., mapping from domain names to IP addresses allows DNS servers to balance
the load between instances of a server), and virtualization of resources for increased user productivity
(e.g., virtual memory).5
    A nice compilation of design principles can be found in Lampson’s article (Lampson, 1989) and
Keshav’s book (Keshav, 1997). Besides design principles, both Lampson and Keshav include a few


5 The previous chapter briefly explains these terms (IP prefixes, DNS, and virtual memory).
                                                                                          3.5 Caveats            67




FIGURE 3.9
Retrieval of a Web page with images typically requires one request to get the page that specifies the needed images
and more requests to retrieve each specified image. Why not have the Web server download the images directly?

implementation principles (e.g., “use hints” and “optimize the expected case”). This book, by contrast,
assumes that much of the network design is already given, and so we focus on principles for efficient
protocol implementation. This book also adds several principles for efficient implementation not found
in Keshav (1991) or Lampson (1989).
    On the other hand, Bentley’s book on “efficient program design” (Bentley, 1982) is more about
optimizing small code segments than the large systems that are our focus; thus many of Bentley’s
principles (e.g., fuse loops, unroll loops, reorder tests) are meant to speed up critical loops rather than
speed up systems as a whole.



3.5 Caveats
                                  Performance problems cannot be solved only through the use of Zen meditation.
                                                —Paraphrased from Jeff Mogul, a computer scientist at HP Labs

The best of principles must be balanced with wisdom to understand the important metrics, with profiling
to determine bottlenecks, and with experimental measurements to confirm that the changes are really
improvements. We start with two case studies to illustrate the need for caution.

                            Case study 1: Reducing page download times
      Fig. 3.9 shows that in order for a Web client to retrieve a Web page containing images, it must
  typically send a GET request for the page. If the page specifies inline images, then the client must
  send separate requests to retrieve the images before it can display the page. A natural application
  of principle P1 is to ask why separate requests are needed. Why can’t the Web server automatically
  download the images when the page is requested instead of waiting for a separate request? This
  should reduce page download latency by at least half a round trip delay.
68     Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



    To test our hypothesis, we modified the server software to do so and measured the resulting
 performance. To our surprise, we found only minimal latency improvement.
    Using a network analyzer based on tcpdump, we found two reasons why this seeming im-
 provement was a bad idea.
 • Interaction with TCP: Web transfer is orchestrated by TCP as described in Chapter 2. To
   avoid network congestion, TCP increases its rate slowly, starting with one packet per round-
   trip, then to two packets per round trip delay, increasing its rate when it gets acks. Since TCP
   had to wait for acks anyway to increase its rate, waiting for additional requests for images did
   not add latency.
 • Interaction with Client Caching: Many clients already cache common images, such as .gif
   files. It is a waste of bandwidth to have the Web server unilaterally download images that
   the client already has in its cache. Note that having the client request the images avoids this
   problem because the client will only request images it does not already have.
 A useful lesson from this case study is the difficulty of improving part of a system (e.g., image
 downloading) because of interactions with other parts of the system (e.g., TCP congestion control).


                  Case study 2: Speeding up signature-based intrusion detection
      As a second example, many network sites field an intrusion detection system, such as Snort
 (2001), that looks for suspicious strings in packet payloads that are characteristics of hacker at-
 tacks. An example is the string “perl.exe,” which may signify an attempt to execute perl and then
 to execute arbitrary commands on a Web server. For every potentially matching rule that contains
 a string, Snort searches for each such string separately using the Boyer–Moore algorithm (Cormen
 et al., 1990). The worst case happens to be a Web packet that matches 310 rules. Simple profiling
 using gprof reveals (Fisk and Varghese, 2001) that 30% of the overhead in Snort arises from string
 searching.
      An obvious application of P1 seemed to be the following: Instead of separate searches for each
 string, use an integrated search algorithm that searches for all possible strings in a single pass over
 the packet. We modified Boyer–Moore to a set Boyer–Moore algorithm that could search for all
 specified strings in one pass. Implemented in a library, the new algorithm performed better than
 the Snort algorithm by a factor of 50 for the full Snort database. Unfortunately, when we integrated
 it into Snort, we found almost no improvement on packet traces (Fisk and Varghese, 2001). We
 found two reasons for this.
 • Multiple string matching is not a bottleneck for the trace: For the given trace, very few
   packets matched multiple rules, each of which contained separate strings. When we used a trace
   containing only Web traffic (i.e., traffic with destination port 80), a substantial improvement
   was found.
 • Cache Effects: Integrated string searching requires a data structure, such as a trie, whose size
   grows with the number of strings being searched. The simplest way to do integrated set search-
   ing is to place the strings contained in all rules in a single trie. However, when the number
                                                                                   3.5 Caveats          69



      of strings went over 100, the trie did not fit in cache, and performance suffered. Thus the
      system had to be reimplemented to use collections of smaller sets that took into account the
      hardware (P4).
  A useful lesson from this case study is that purported improvements may not really target the
  bottleneck (which in the trace appears to be single-string matching) and can also interact with
  other parts of the system (the data cache).



3.5.1 Eight cautionary questions
In the spirit of the two case studies, here are eight cautionary questions that warn against the injudicious
use of the principles.

Q1: Is it worth improving performance?
If one were to sell the system as a product, is performance a major selling strength? People interested
in performance improvement would like to think so, but other aspects of a system, such as ease of use,
functionality, and robustness, may be more important. For example, a user of a network management
product cares more about features than performance. Thus, given limited resources and implementation
complexity, we may choose to defer optimizations until needed. Even if performance is important,
which performance metric (e.g., latency throughput, memory) is important?
    Other things being equal, simplicity is best. Simple systems are easier to understand, debug, and
maintain. On the other hand, the definition of simplicity changes with technology and time. Some
amount of complexity is worthwhile for large performance gains. For example, years ago image com-
pression algorithms such as MPEG were considered too complex to implement in software or hardware.
However, with increasing chip densities, many MPEG chips have come to market.

Q2: Is this really a bottleneck?
The 80–20 rule suggests that a large percentage of the performance improvements comes from op-
timizing a small fraction of the system. A simple way to start is to identify key bottlenecks for the
performance metrics we wish to optimize. One way to do so is to use profiling tools, as we did in Case
Study 2.

Q3: What impact does the change have on the rest of the system?
A simple change may speed up a portion of the system but may have complex and unforeseen effects
on the rest of the system. This is illustrated in Case Study 1. A change that improves performance but
has too many interactions should be reconsidered.

Q4: Does the initial analysis indicate significant improvement?
Before doing a complete implementation, a quick analysis can indicate how much gain is possible.
Standard complexity analysis is useful. However, when nanoseconds are at stake, constant factors are
important. For software and hardware, because memory accesses are a bottleneck, a reasonable first-
pass estimate is the number of memory accesses.
    For example, suppose analysis indicates that address lookup in a router is a bottleneck (e.g., because
there are fast switches to make data transfer not a bottleneck). Suppose the standard algorithm takes an
70       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



average of 15 memory accesses while a new algorithm indicates a worst case of 3 memory accesses.
This suggests a factor of 5 improvement, which makes it interesting to proceed further.

Q5: Is it worth adding custom hardware?
With the continued improvement in the price–performance of general-purpose processors, it is tempting
to implement algorithms in software and ride the price–performance curve. Thus if we are considering
a piece of custom hardware that takes a year to design, and the resulting price–performance improve-
ment is only a factor of 2, it may not be worth the effort. On the other hand, hardware design times
are shrinking with the advent of effective synthesis tools. Volume manufacturing can also result in ex-
tremely small costs (compared to general-purpose processors) for a custom-designed chip. Having an
edge for even a small period such as a year in a competitive market is attractive. This has led companies
to increasingly place networking functions in silicon.

Q6: Can protocol changes be avoided?
Through the years there have been several proposals denouncing particular protocols as being inef-
ficient and proposing alternative protocols designed for performance. For example, in the 1980s, the
transport protocol TCP was considered “slow” and a protocol called XTP (Chesson, 1989) was explic-
itly designed to be implemented in hardware. This stimulated research into making TCP fast, which
culminated in Van Jacobson’s fast implementation of TCP (Clark et al., 1989) in the standard BSD
(Berkeley software distribution) release. More recently, proposals for protocol changes (e.g., tag and
flow switching) to finesse the need for IP lookups have stimulated research into fast IP lookups.

Q7: Do prototypes confirm the initial promise?
Once we have successfully answered all the preceding questions, it is still a good idea to build a pro-
totype or simulation and actually test to see if the improvement is real. This is because we are dealing
with complex systems; the initial analysis rarely captures all effects encountered in practice. For ex-
ample, understanding that the Web-image-dumping idea does not improve latency (see Case Study 1)
might come only after a real implementation and tests with a network analyzer.
    A major problem is finding a standard set of benchmarks to compare the standard and new imple-
mentations. For example, in the general systems world, despite some disagreement, there are standard
benchmarks for floating-point performance (e.g., Whetstone) or database performance (e.g., debit–
credit). If one claims to reduce Web transfer latencies using differential encoding, what set of Web
pages provides a reasonable benchmark to prove this contention? If one claims to have an IP lookup
scheme with small storage, which benchmark databases can be used to support this assertion?

Q8: Will performance gains be lost if the environment changes?
Sadly, the job is not quite over even if a prototype implementation is built and a benchmark shows that
performance improvements are close to initial projections. The difficulty is that the improvement may
be specific to the particular platform used (which can change) and may take advantage of properties
of a certain benchmark (which may not reflect all environments in which the system will be used).
The improvements may still be worthwhile, but some form of sensitivity analysis is still useful for the
future.
    For example, Van Jacobson performed a major optimization of the BSD networking code that al-
lowed ordinary workstations to saturate 100-Mbps FDDI (Fiber Distributed Data Interface) rings. The
                                                                                 3.7 Exercises          71



optimization, which we will study in detail in Chapter 9, assumes that in the normal case the next packet
is from the same connection as the previous packet, P , and has sequence number one higher than P .
Will this assumption hold for servers that have thousands of simultaneous connections to clients? Will
it hold if packets get sent over parallel links in the network, resulting in packet reordering? Fortunately,
the code has worked well in practice for a number of years. Despite this, such questions alert us to
possible future dangers.



3.6 Summary
This chapter introduced a set of principles for efficient system implementation. A summary can be
found in Figs. 3.1–3.3. The principles were illustrated with examples drawn from compilers, archi-
tecture, databases, algorithms, and networks to show broad applicability to computer systems. Chef
Charlie’s examples, while somewhat tongue in cheek, show that these principles also extend to general
systems, from restaurants to state governments. While the broad focus is on performance, cost is an
equally important metric. One can cast problems in the form of finding the fastest solution for a given
cost. Optimization of other metrics, such as bandwidth, storage, and computation, can be subsumed
under the cost metric.
    A preview of well-known networking applications of the 15 principles can be found in Figs. 3.1–3.3.
These applications will be explained in detail in later chapters. The first five principles encourage
systems thinking. The next five principles encourage a fresh look at system modularity. The last five
principles point to useful ways to speed up individual subsystems.
    Just as chess strategies are boring until one plays a game of chess, implementation principles are
lifeless without concrete examples. The reader is encouraged to try the following exercises, which
provide more examples drawn from computer systems. The principles will be applied to networks in
the remaining chapters. In particular, the next chapter seeks to engage the reader by providing a set of
15 self-contained networking problems to play with.



3.7 Exercises
1. Batching, Disk Locality, and Logs: Most serious databases use log files for performance. Because
   writes to disk are expensive, it is cheaper to update only a memory image of a record. However,
   because a crash can occur at any time, the update must also be recorded on disk. This can be done
   by directly updating the record location on disk, but random writes to disk are expensive (see P4a).
   Instead, information on the update is written to a sequential log file. The log entry contains the
   record location, the old value (undo information), and the new value (redo information).
   • Suppose a disk page of 4000 bytes can be written using one disk I/O and that a log record is
     50 bytes. If we apply batching (2c), what is a reasonable strategy for updating the log? What
     fraction of a disk I/O should be charged to a log update?
   • Before a transaction that does the update can commit (i.e., tell the user it is done), it must be
     sure the log is written. Why? Explain why this leads to another form of batching, group commit,
     where multiple transactions are committed together.
72       Chapter 3 Fifteen implementation principles



   • If the database represented by the log gets too far ahead of the database represented on disk,
     crash recovery can take too long. Describe a strategy to bound crash recovery times.
2. Relaxing Consistency Requirements in a Name Service: The Grapevine system (Birell et al.,
   1982) offers a combination of a name service (to translate user names to inboxes) and a mail service.
   To improve availability, Grapevine name servers are replicated. Thus any update to a registration
   record (e.g., Joe → MailSlot3) must be performed on all servers implementing replicas of that
   record. Standard database techniques for distributed databases require that each update be atomic;
   that is, the effect should be as if updates were done simultaneously on all replicas. Because atomic
   updates require that all servers be available, and registration information is not as important as,
   say, bank accounts, Grapevine provides only the following loose semantics (P3): All replicas will
   eventually agree if updates stop. Each update is timestamped and passed from one replica to the
   other in arbitrary order. The highest timestamped update wins.
   • Give an example of how a user could detect inconsistency in Joe’s registration during the con-
     vergence process.
   • If Joe’s record is deleted, it should eventually be purged from the database to save storage. Sup-
     pose a server purges Joe’s record immediately after receiving a Delete update. Why might Add
     updates possibly cause a problem? Suggest a solution.
   • The rule that the latest timestamp wins does not work well when two administrators try to create
     an entry with the same name. Because a later creation could be trapped in a crashed server,
     the administrator of the earlier creation can never know for sure that his creation has won. The
     Grapevine designers did not introduce mechanisms to solve this problem but relied on “some
     human-level centralization of name creation.” Explain their assumption clearly.
3. Replacing General-Purpose Routines with Special-Purpose Routines and Efficient Storage
   Allocators: Consider the design of a general storage allocator that is given control of a large contigu-
   ous piece of memory and may be asked by applications for smaller, variable-size chunks. A general
   allocator is quite complex: As time goes by, the available memory fragments and time must be spent
   finding a piece of the requested size and coalescing adjacent released pieces into larger free blocks.
   • Briefly sketch the design of a general-purpose allocator. Consult a textbook such as Horowitz
     and Sahni (1978) for examples of allocators.
   • Suppose a profile has shown that a large fraction of the applications ask for 64 bytes of storage.
     Describe a more efficient allocator that works for the special case (P6) of allocating just 64-byte
     quantities.
   • How would you optimize the expected case (P11) and yet handle requests for storage other than
     64 bytes?
4. Passing Information in Interfaces: Consider a file system that is reading or writing files from
   disk. Each random disk Read/Write involves positioning the disk over the correct track (seeking).
   If we have a sequence of, say, three Reads to Tracks 1, 15, and 7, it may pay to reorder the second
   and third Reads to reduce waste in terms of seek times. Clearly, as in P1, the larger the context of
   the optimization (e.g., the number of Reads or Writes considered for reordering), the greater the
   potential benefits of such seek optimization.
                                                                                3.7 Exercises          73



   A normal file system only has an interface to open, read, and write a single file. However, suppose
   an application is reading multiple files and can pass that information (P9) in the file system call.
   • What information about the pattern of file accesses would be useful for the file system to perform
     seek optimization? What should the interface look like?
   • Give examples of applications that process multiple files and could benefit from this optimization.
     For more details, see the paper by Patterson et al. (1995). They call this form of tip a disclosure.
5. Optimizing the Expected Case, Using Algorithmic Ideas, and Scavenging Files: The Alto com-
   puter used a scavenging system (Lampson, 1989) that scans the disk after a crash to reconstruct file
   system indexes that map from file names and blocks to disk sectors. This can be done because each
   disk sector that contains a file block also contains the corresponding file identifier. What complicates
   matters is that the main memory is not large enough to hold information for every disk sector. Thus
   a single scan that builds a list in memory for each file will not work. Assume that the information
   for a single file will fit into memory. Thus a way that will work is to make a single scan of the disk
   for each file, but that would be obvious waste (P1) and too slow.
   Instead, observe that in the expected case, most files are allocated contiguously. Thus suppose File
   X has pages 1–1000 located on disk sectors 301–1300. Thus the information about 1000 sectors can
   be compactly represented by three integers and a file name. Call this a run node.
   • Assume the expected case holds and that all run nodes can fit in memory. Assume also that the
     file index for each file is an array (stored on disk) that maps from file block number to disk sector
     number. Show how to rebuild all the file indexes.
   • Now suppose the expected case does not hold and that the run nodes do not all fit into memory.
     Describe a technique, based on the algorithmic idea of divide-and-conquer (P15), that is guaran-
     teed to work (without reverting to the naive idea of building the index for one file at a time unless
     strictly necessary).
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                                                               CHAPTER


Principles in action
                                                                                                                   4
                              System architecture and design, like any art, can only be learned by doing. . . . The space of
                                                                      possibilities unfolds only as the medium is worked.
                                                                                           —Carver Mead and Lynn Conway


                                             Having rounded up my horses, I now set myself to put them through their paces.
                                                                                                            —Arnold Toynbee



The previous chapter outlined 15 principles for efficient network protocol implementation. Part 2 of the
book begins a detailed look at specific network bottlenecks such as data copying and control transfer.
While the principles are used in these later chapters, the focus of these later chapters is on the specific
bottleneck being examined. Given that network algorithmics is as much a way of thinking as it is a
set of techniques, it seems useful to round out Part 1 by seeing the principles in action on small, self-
contained, but nontrivial network problems.
    Thus this chapter provides examples of applying the principles in solving specific networking prob-
lems. The examples are drawn from real problems, and some of the solutions are used in real products.
Unlike subsequent chapters, this chapter is not a collection of new material followed by a set of exer-
cises. Instead, this chapter can be thought of as an extended set of exercises.
    In Sections 4.1 to 4.15 15 problems are motivated and described. Each problem is followed by a
hint that suggests specific principles, which is then followed by a solution sketch. There are also a few
exercises after each solution. In classes and seminars on the topic of this chapter, the audience enjoyed
inventing solutions by themselves (after a few hints were provided), rather than directly seeing the final
solutions.


    Quick reference guide
    In an ideal world, each problem should have something interesting for every reader. For those readers pressed for time,
    however, here is some guidance. Hardware designers looking to sample a few problems may wish to try their hand at
    designing an Ethernet monitor (Section 4.4) or doing a binary search on long identifiers (Section 4.14). Systems people
    looking for examples of how systems thinking can finesse algorithmic expertise may wish to tackle a problem on applica-
    tion device channels (Section 4.1) or a problem on compressing the connection table (Section 4.11). Algorithm designers
    may be interested in the problem of identifying a resource hog (Section 4.10) and a problem on the use of protocol design
    changes to simplify an implementation problem in link state routing (Section 4.8).




Network Algorithmics. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-809927-8.00009-9
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                                            75
76        Chapter 4 Principles in action




4.1 Buffer validation of application device channels
Usually, application programs can only send network data through the operating system kernel, and only
the kernel is allowed to talk to the network adaptor. This restriction prevents different applications from
(maliciously or accidentally) writing or reading each other’s data. However, communication through
the kernel adds overhead in the form of system calls (see Chapter 2). In application device channels
(ADCs), the idea is to allow an application to send data to and from the network by directly writing
to the memory of the network adaptor. Refer to Chapter 5 for more details. One mechanism to ensure
protection, in lieu of kernel mediation, is to have the kernel set up the adaptor with a set of valid memory
pages for each application. The network adaptor must then ensure that the application’s data can only
be sent and received from memory in the valid set.
    In Fig. 4.1, for example, application P is allowed to send and receive data from a set of valid pages
X, Y, . . . , L, A. Suppose application P queues a request to the adaptor to receive the next packet for P
into a buffer in page A. Since this request is sent directly to the adaptor, the kernel cannot check that
this is a valid buffer for P . Instead, the adaptor must validate this request by ensuring that A is in the
set of valid pages. If the adaptor does not perform this check, application P could supply an invalid
page belonging to some other application, and the adaptor would write P ’s data into the wrong page.
The need for a check leads to the following problem.

Problem
When application P does a Receive, the adaptor must validate whether the page belongs to the valid
page set for P . If the set of pages is organized as a linear list (Druschel et al., 1994), then validation can
cost O(n), where n is the number of pages in the set. For instance, in Fig. 4.1, since A is at the end of
the list of valid pages, the adaptor must traverse the entire list before it finds A. If n is large, this can be
expensive and can slow down the rate at which the adaptor can send and receive packets. How can the




FIGURE 4.1
In application device channels, the network adaptor is given a set of valid pages (X, Y, L, A, etc.) for a given ap-
plication P . When application P makes a request to receive data into page A, the adaptor must check if A is in the
valid list before allowing the receive.
                                     4.1 Buffer validation of application device channels                         77



validation process be sped up? Try thinking through the solution before reading the hint and solutions
that follow.

Hint: A good approach to reduce the complexity of validation is to use a better data structure than
a list (P15). Which data structure would you choose? However, one can improve worst-case behavior
even further and get smaller constant factors by using system thinking and by passing hints in
interfaces (P9).
    An algorithmic thinker will immediately consider implementing the set of valid pages as a hash
table instead of a list. This provides an O(1) average search time. Hashing has two disadvan-
tages: (1) good hash functions that have small collision probabilities are expensive computationally;
(2) hashing does not provide a good worst-case bound. Binary search does provide logarithmic worst-
case search times, but this is expensive (it also requires keeping the set sorted) if the set of pages
is large and packet transmission rates are higher. Instead, we replace the hash table lookup by an
indexed array lookup, as follows (try using P9 before you read on).


Solution
The adaptor stores the set of valid pages for each application in an array, as shown in Fig. 4.2. This array
is updated only when the kernel updates the set of valid pages for the application. When the application
does a Receive into page A, it also passes to the adaptor a handle (P9). The handle is the index of the
array position where A is stored. The adaptor can use this to quickly confirm whether the page in the
Receive request matches the page stored in the handle. The cost of validation is a bounds check (to see
if the handle is a valid index), one array lookup, and one compare.

Exercises

• Is the handle a hint or a tip? Let’s invoke principle P1: If this is a handle, why pass the page number
  (e.g., A) in the interface? Why does removing the page number speed up the confirmation task
  slightly?




FIGURE 4.2
Finessing the need for a hash table lookup by passing a handle across the interface between the application and
adaptor.
78        Chapter 4 Principles in action



• To find the array corresponding to application P normally requires a hash table search using P as
  the key. This weakens the argument for getting rid of the hash table search to check if the page is
  valid—unless, of course, the hash search of P can be finessed as well. How can this be done?



4.2 Scheduler for asynchronous transfer mode flow control
In asynchronous transfer mode (ATM), an ATM adaptor may have hundreds of simultaneous virtual
circuits (VCs) that can send data (called cells). Each VC is often flow controlled in some way to limit
the rate at which it can send. For example, in rate-based flow control, a VC may receive credits to send
cells at fixed time intervals. On the other hand, in credit-based flow control (Kung et al., 1994; Ozveren
et al., 1994), credits may be sent by the next node in the path when buffers free up.
    Thus in Fig. 4.3 the adaptor has a table that holds the VC state. There are four VCs that have been
set up (1, 3, 5, 7). Of these, only VCs 1, 5, and 7 have some cells to send. Finally, only VCs 1 and
7 have credits to send cells. Thus the next cell to be sent by the adaptor should be from either one of
the eligible VCs: 1 or 7. The selection from the eligible VCs should be done fairly, for example, in
round-robin fashion. If the adaptor chooses to send a cell from VC 7, the adaptor would decrement the
credits of VC 7 to 1. Since there are no more cells to be sent, VC 7 now becomes ineligible. Choosing
the next eligible VC leads to the following problem.

Problem
A naive scheduler may cycle through the VC array looking for a VC that is eligible. If many of the VCs
are ineligible, this can be quite inefficient, for the scheduler may have to step through several VCs that
are ineligible to send one cell from an eligible VC. How can this inefficiency be avoided?
Hint: Consider invoking P12 to add some extra state to speed up the scheduler main loop. What
state can you add to avoid stepping through ineligible VCs? How would you maintain this state
efficiently?




FIGURE 4.3
An ATM VC is eligible to send data if it is active (has some outstanding cells to send in the queue shown below the
VC) and has credits (shown by gray dots above the VC). The problem is to select the next eligible VC in some fair
manner without stepping through VCs that are ineligible.
                                         4.3 Route computation using Dijkstra’s algorithm                  79




FIGURE 4.4
Maintaining a list of eligible VCs to speed up the scheduler main loop.


Solution
Maintain a list (Fig. 4.4) of eligible VCs in addition to the VC table of Fig. 4.3. The only problem is to
efficiently maintain this state. This is the major difficulty in using P12. If the state is too expensive to
maintain, the added state is a liability and not an asset. Recall that a VC is eligible if it has both cells to
send and has credits. Thus a VC is removed from the list after service if VC becomes inactive or has no
more credits; if not, the VC is added to the tail of the list to ensure fairness. A VC is added to the tail
of the list either when a cell arrives to an empty VC cell queue and this (empty) queue also has credits
or when the VC has no credits and receives a credit update.

Exercises

• How can you be sure that a VC is not added multiple times to the eligible list?
• Can this scheme be generalized to allow some VCs to get more opportunities to send than other VCs
  based on a weight assigned by a manager?




4.3 Route computation using Dijkstra’s algorithm
How does a router S decide how to route a packet to a given destination D? Every link in a network is
labeled with a cost, and routers like S often compute the shortest (i.e., lowest-cost) paths to destinations
within a local domain. Assume the cost is a small integer. Recall from Chapter 2 that the most com-
monly used routing protocol within a domain is OSPF (Open Shortest Path First) based on link state
routing.
    In link state routing, every router in a subnet sends a link state packet (LSP) that lists its links to
all of its neighbors. Each LSP is sent to every other router in the subnet. Each router sends its LSP
to other routers using a primitive flooding protocol (Perlman, 1992). Once every router receives an
LSP from every router, then every router has a complete map of the network. Assuming the topology
remains stable, each router can now calculate its shortest path to every other node in the network using
a standard shortest-path algorithm, such as Dijkstra’s algorithm (Cormen et al., 1990).
    In Fig. 4.5 source S wishes to calculate a shortest-path tree to all other nodes (A, B, C, D) in the
network. The network is shown on the left frame in Fig. 4.5 with links numbered with their costs. In
Dijkstra’s algorithm S begins by placing only itself in the shortest-path tree. S also updates the cost
to reach all its direct neighbors (e.g., B, A). At each iteration, Dijkstra’s algorithm adds to the current
80        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.5
In Dijkstra’s algorithm the source S builds a shortest-path tree rooted at S. At each stage, the closest node not in the
tree is added to the tree.



tree the node that is closest to the current tree. The costs of the neighbors of this newly added node are
updated. The process repeats until all nodes in the network belong to the tree.
    For instance, in Fig. 4.5, after adding S, the algorithm picks B and then picks A. At this iteration,
the tree is as shown on the right in Fig. 4.5. The solid lines show the existing tree, and the dotted lines
show the best current connections to nodes that are not already in the tree. Thus since A has a cost of
2 and there is a link of cost 3 from A to C, C is labeled with 5. Similarly, D is labeled with a cost of
3 for the path through B. At the next iteration, the algorithm picks D as the least-cost node not already
in the tree. The cost to C is then updated using the route through D. Finally, C is added to the tree in
the last iteration.
    This textbook solution requires determining the node with the least cost that is not already in the
tree at each iteration. The standard data structure to keep track of the minimum-value element in a
dynamically changing set is a priority queue. This leads to the following problem.

Problem
Dijkstra’s algorithm requires a priority queue at each of N iterations, where N is the number of network
nodes. The best general-purpose priority queues, such as heaps (Cormen et al., 1990), take O(log N )
cost to find the minimum element. This implies a total running time of O(N log N ) time. For a large
network, this can result in slow response to failures and other network topology changes. How can route
computation be speeded up?
Hint: Consider exploiting the fact that the link costs are small integers (P14) by using an array to
represent the current costs of nodes. How can you efficiently, at least in an amortized sense, find
the next minimum-cost node to include in the shortest-path tree?

Solution
The fact that the link costs are small integers can be exploited to construct a priority queue based on
bucket sorting (P14). Assume that the largest link cost is MaxLinkCost. Thus the maximum cost of a
path can be no more than Diam ∗ MaxLinkCost, where Diam is the diameter of the network. Assume
Diam is also a small integer. Thus one could imagine using an array with a location for every possible
cost c in the range 1 . . . Diam ∗ MaxLinkCost. If during the course of Dijkstra’s algorithm the current
                                        4.3 Route computation using Dijkstra’s algorithm               81




FIGURE 4.6
Using a priority queue based on bucket sorting to speed up Dijkstra’s algorithm.


cost of a node X is c, then node X can be placed in a list pointed to by element c of the array (Fig. 4.6).
This leads to the following algorithm.
    Whenever a node X changes its cost from c to c , node X is removed from the list for c and added to
the list for c . But how is the minimum element to be found? This can be done by initializing a pointer
called CurrentMin to 0 (which corresponds to the cost of S). Each time the algorithm wishes to find the
minimum-cost node not in the tree, CurrentMin is incremented by 1 until an array location is reached
that contains a nonempty list. Any node in this list can then be added to the tree. The algorithm costs
O(N + Diam ∗ MaxLinkCost) because the work done in advancing CurrentMin can at most be the size
of the array. This can be significantly better than N log N for large N and small values of Diam and
MaxLinkCost.
    A crucial factor in being able to efficiently use a bucket sort priority queue of the kind described
earlier is that the node costs are always ahead of the value of CurrentMin. This is a monotonicity
condition. If it were not true, the algorithm would start checking for the minimum from 1 at each
iteration, instead of starting from the last value of CurrentMin and never backing up. The monotonicity
condition is fairly obvious for Dijktra’s algorithm because the costs of nodes not already in the tree
have to be larger than the costs of nodes that are already in the tree.
    Fig. 4.6 shows the state of the bucket sort priority queue after A has been added to the tree. This
corresponds to the right frame of Fig. 4.5. At this stage, CurrentMin = 2, which is the cost of A. At the
next iteration, CurrentMin will advance to 3, and D will be added to the tree. This will result in the C’s
cost being reduced to 4. We thus remove C from the list in position 5 and add it to the empty list in
position 4. CurrentMin is then advanced to 4, and C is added to the tree.

Exercises

• The algorithm requires a node to be removed from a list and added to another, earlier list. How can
  this be done efficiently?
• In Fig. 4.6 how can the algorithm know that it can terminate after adding C to the tree instead of
  advancing to the end of the long array?
• In networks that have failures, the concept of diameter is a highly suspect one because the diameter
  could change considerably after a failure. Consider a wheel topology where all N nodes have diam-
82       Chapter 4 Principles in action



  eter 2 through a central spoke node; if the central spoke node fails, the diameter goes up to N/2. In
  actual practice the diameter is often small. Can this cause problems in sizing the array?
• Can you circumvent the problem of the diameter completely by replacing the linear array of Fig. 4.6
  with a circular array of size MaxLinkCost? Explain. The resulting solution is known as Dial’s
  algorithm (Ahuja et al., 1993).



4.4 Ethernet monitor using bridge hardware
Alyssa P. Hacker is working for Acme Networks and knows of the Ethernet bridge invented at Acme.
A bridge (see Chapter 10) is a device that can connect Ethernets together. To forward packets from one
Ethernet to another, the bridge must look up the 48-bit destination address in an Ethernet packet at high
speeds.
    Alyssa decides to convert the bridge into an Ethernet traffic monitor that will passively listen to
an Ethernet and produce statistics about traffic patterns. The marketing person tells her that she needs
to monitor traffic between arbitrary source–destination pairs. Thus for every active source–destination
pair, such as A, B, Alyssa must keep a variable PA,B that measures the number of packets sent from A
to B since the monitor was started. When a packet is sent from A to B, the monitor (which is listening
to all packets sent on the cable) will pick up a copy of the packet. If the source is A and the destination is
B, the monitor should increment PA,B . The problem is to do this in 64 µsec, the minimum interpacket
time on the Ethernet. The bottleneck is the lookup of the state PA,B associated with a pair of 48-bit
addresses A, B.
    Fortunately, the bridge hardware has a spiffy lookup hardware engine that can look up the state
associated with a single 48-bit address in 1.4 µsec. A call to the hardware can be expressed as Lookup(X,
D), where X is the 48-bit key and D is the database to be searched. The call returns the state associated
with X in 1.4 µsec for databases of less than 64,000 keys. What Alyssa must solve is the following
problem.

Problem
The monitor needs to update state for AB when a packet from A to B arrives. The monitor has a lookup
engine that can look up only single addresses and not address pairs. How can Alyssa use the existing
engine to look up address pairs? The problem is illustrated in Fig. 4.7.

Hint: The problem requires using P4c to exploit the existing bridge hardware. Since 1.4 µsec is
much smaller than 64 µsec, the design can afford to use more than one hardware lookup. How can
a 96-bit lookup be reduced to a 48-bit lookup using three lookups?
    A naive solution is to use two lookups to convert source A and destination B into smaller
(<24-bit) indices IA and IB . The indices IA and IB can then be used to look up a two-dimensional
array that stores the state for AB. This requires only two hardware lookups plus one more mem-
ory access, but it can require large amounts of memory. If there are 1000 possible sources and
1000 possible destinations, the array must contain a million entries. In practice, there may be
only 20,000 active source–destination pairs. How could you make the required amount of memory
proportional to the number of actual source–destination pairs?
                                                4.4 Ethernet monitor using bridge hardware                        83




FIGURE 4.7
Adapting an engine that does destination lookups to doing source-destination lookups.




FIGURE 4.8
Converting a 96-bit lookup into a 48-bit lookup by first converting each 48-bit address into a 24-bit index and
concatenating the indices.




Solution
As before, first use one lookup each to convert source A and destination B into smaller (<24-bit)
indices IA and IB . Then use a third lookup to map from IA IB to AB state. The solution is illustrated in
Fig. 4.8. The third lookup effectively compresses the two-dimensional array of the naive solution. This
solution is due to Mark Kempf and Mike Soha.

Exercises

• Can this problem be solved using only two bridge hardware lookups without requiring extra mem-
  ory?
• The set of active source–destination pairs may change with time because some pairs of addresses
  stop communicating for long periods. How can this be handled without keeping the state for every
  possible address pair that has communicated since the monitor was powered on?
84        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.9
Demultiplexing in the x-kernel is done by hashing the protocol identifier K and (potentially) using a byte-by-byte
comparison with the key L stored at the hash table entry.



4.5 Demultiplexing in the x-kernel
The x-kernel (Hutchinson and Peterson, 1991) provides a software infrastructure for protocol imple-
mentation in hosts. The x-kernel system provides support for a number of required protocol functions.
One commonly required function is protocol demultiplexing. For example, when the Internet routing
layer IP receives a packet, it must use the protocol field to determine whether the packet should be
subsequently sent to TCP (transmission control protocol) or UDP (user datagram protocol).
    Most protocols do demultiplexing based on some identifier in the protocol header. These identifiers
can vary in length in different protocols. For example, Ethernet-type fields can be 5 bytes while TCP
port numbers are 2 bytes long. Thus the x-kernel allows demultiplexing based on variable-length pro-
tocol identifiers. When the system is initialized, the protocol routine can register the mapping between
the identifier and the destination protocol with the x-kernel. At run time, when a packet arrives the pro-
tocol routine can extract the protocol identifier from the packet and query the x-kernel demultiplexing
routine for the destination protocol. Since packets can arrive at high speeds, the demultiplexing routine
should be fast. This leads to the following problem.

Problem
On average, the fastest way to do a lookup is to use a hash table. As shown in Fig. 4.9, this requires
computing some hash function on the identifier K to generate a hash index, using this index to access
the hash table, and comparing the key L stored in the hash table entry with K. If there is a match, the
demultiplexing routine can retrieve the destination protocol associated with key L. Assume that the
hash function has been chosen to make collisions infrequent.
    However, since the identifier length is an arbitrary number of bytes, the comparison routine that
compares the two keys must, in general, do byte-by-byte comparisons. However, suppose the most
common case is 4-byte identifiers, which is the machine word size. In this case, it is much more efficient
to do a word comparison. Thus the goal is to exploit efficient word comparisons (P4c) to optimize the
expected case (P11). How can this be done while still handling arbitrary protocols?

Hint: Notice that if the x-kernel has to demultiplex a 3-byte identifier, it has to use a byte-by-
byte comparison routine; if the x-kernel has to demultiplex a 4-byte identifier and 4 bytes are the
machine word size, it can use a word compare. The first degree of freedom that can be exploited is
to have different comparison routines for the most common cases (e.g., word compares, long-word
compares) and a default comparison routine that uses byte comparisons. Doing so trades some extra
                                                                4.6 Tries with node compression            85



space for time (P4b). For correctness, however, it is important to know which comparison routine
to use for each protocol. Consider invoking principles P9 to pass hints in interfaces and P2a to do
some precomputation.

Solution
Each protocol has to declare its identifier and destination protocol to the x-kernel when the system
initializes. When this happens, each protocol can predeclare its identifier length, so the x-kernel can use
a specialized comparison routine for each protocol. Effectively, information is being passed between the
client protocol and the x-kernel (P9) at an earlier time (P2a). Assume that the x-kernel has a separate
hash table for each client protocol and that the x-kernel knows the context for each client in order to
use code specialized for thatclient.

Exercises

• Code up byte-by-byte and word comparisons on your machine and do a large number of both types
  of comparisons and compare the overall time taken for each.
• In the earlier ADC solution, the hash table lookup was finessed by passing an index (instead of the
  identifier length as earlier). Why might that solution be difficult in this case?



4.6 Tries with node compression
A trie is a data structure that is a tree of nodes, where each node is an array of M elements. Fig. 4.10
shows a simple example with M = 8. Each array can hold either a key (e.g., KEY 1, KEY 2, or KEY 3
in Fig. 4.10) or a pointer to another trie node (e.g., the first element in the topmost trie node of Fig. 4.10,
which is the root). The trie is used to search for exact matches (and longest-prefix matches) with an
input string. Tries are useful in networking for such varied tasks as IP address lookups (Chapter 11),
bridge lookups (Chapter 10), and demultiplexing filters (Chapter 8).




FIGURE 4.10
Trie storing three keys. Notice the wasted space in the trie nodes.
86       Chapter 4 Principles in action



    The exact trie algorithms do not concern us here. All one needs to know is how a trie is searched.
Let c = log2 M be the chunk size of a trie. To search the trie, search first breaks the input string into
chunks of size c. Search uses successive chunks, starting from the most significant, to index into nodes
of the trie, starting with the root node. When search uses chunk j to index into position i of the current
trie node, position i could contain either a pointer or a key. If position i contains a nonnull pointer to
node N , the search continues at node N with chunk j + 1; otherwise, the search terminates.
    To summarize, each node is an array of pointers or keys, and the search process needs to index
into these arrays. However, if many trie nodes are sparse, there is considerable wasted space (P1). For
example, in Fig. 4.10, only 4 out of 16 locations contain useful information. In the worst case, each
trie node could contain 1 pointer or key and there could be a factor of M in wasted memory. Assume
M ≤ 32 in what follows. Even if M is this small, a 32-fold increase in memory can greatly increase the
cost of the design.
    An obvious approach is to replace each trie node by a linear list of pairs of the form (i, val), where
val is the nonempty value (either pointer or key) in position i of the node. For example, the root trie
node in Fig. 4.10 could be replaced by the list (1, ptr1); (7, KEY 1), where ptr1 is the pointer to the
bottom trie node. Unfortunately, this can slow down trie search by a factor of M, because the search
of each trie node may now have to search through a list of M locations, instead of a single indexing
operation. This leads to the following problem.

Problem
How can trie nodes be compressed to remove null pointers without slowing down search by more than
a small factor?
Hint: Despite compressing the nodes, array indexing needs to be efficient. If the nodes are com-
pressed, how might information about which array elements are removed be represented? Consider
leveraging off the fact that M is small by following P14 (exploit the small integer size) and P4a
(exploit locality).

Solution
Since M < 32, a bitmap of size 32 can easily fit into a computer word (P14 and P4a). Thus null pointers
are removed after adding a bitmap with zero bits indicating the original positions of null pointers. This
is shown in Fig. 4.11. The trie node can now be replaced with a bitmap and a compressed trie node.
A compressed trie node is an array that consists only of the nonnull values in the original node. Thus in
Fig. 4.11, the original root trie node (on the top) has been replaced with the compressed trie node (on
the bottom). The bitmap contains a 1 in the first and seventh positions, where the root node contains
nonnull values. The compressed array now contains only two elements, the first pointer and KEY 3.
This still begs the question: How should a trie node be searched?
    Since both uncompressed and compressed nodes are arrays and the search process starts with an
index I into the uncompressed node, the search process must consult the bitmap to convert the uncom-
pressed index I into a compressed index C into the compressed node. For example, if I is 1 in Fig. 4.11,
C should be 1; if I is 7, C should be 2. If I is any other value, C should be 0, indicating that there is
only a null pointer.
    Fortunately, the conversion from I to C can be accomplished easily by noting the following. If
position I in the bitmap contains a 0, then C = 0. Otherwise, C is the number of 1’s in the first I bits of
the bitmap. Thus if I = 7, then C = 2, since there are two bits set in the first seven bits of the bitmap.
                                                                  4.7 Packet filtering in routers                  87




FIGURE 4.11
Compressing a trie node using a bitmap and bit counting to efficiently translate from an uncompressed index to a
compressed index.


    This computation requires at most two memory references: one to access the bitmap (because the
bitmap is small [P4a]) and one to access the compressed array. The calculation of the number of bits
set in a bitmap can be done using internal registers (in software) or combinatorial logic (in hardware).
Thus the effective slowdown is slightly more than a factor of 2 in software and exactly 2 in hardware.

Exercises

• How could you use table lookup (P14, P2a) to speed up counting the number of bits set in software?
  Would this necessarily require a third memory reference?
• Suppose the bitmap is large (say, M = 64 K). It would appear that counting the number of bits set
  in such a large bitmap is impossibly slow in hardware or software. Can you find a way to speed up
  counting bits in a large bitmap (principles P12 and P2a) using only one extra memory access? This
  will be extremely useful in Chapter 11.



4.7 Packet filtering in routers
Chapter 12 describes protocols that set up resources at routers for traffic, such as video, that needs
performance guarantees. Such protocols use the concept of packet filters, sometimes called classifiers.
Thus, in Fig. 4.12 each receiver attached to a router may specify a packet filter describing the packets
it wishes to receive. For example, in Fig. 4.12 Receiver 1 may be interested in receiving NBC, which is
specified by Filter 4. Each filter is some specification of the fields that describe the video packets that
NBC sends. For example, NBC may be specified by packets that use the source address of the NBC
transmitter in Germany and use a specified TCP destination and source port number.
    Similarly, in Fig. 4.12 Receiver m may be interested in receiving ABC Sports and CNN, which are
described by Filters 1 and 7, respectively. Packets arrive at the router at high speeds and must be sent
88        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.12
Packet filtering in a router may require a slow linear scan of all filters followed by making a copy of the packet for
all filters that match.


to all receivers that request the packet. For example, Receivers 1 and 2 may both wish to receive NBC.
This leads to the following problem.
Problem
Each receiving packet must be matched against all filters and sent to all receivers that match. A simple
linear scan of all filters is expensive if the number of filters is large. Assume the number of filters is
over a thousand. How can this expensive process be sped up?
Hint: One might think of optimizing the expected case by caching (P11a). However, why is caching
difficult in this case? Consider adding a field (P10) to the packet header to make caching easier.
Ideally, which protocol layer should this be added to? Adding a fixed well-known field for each
possible video type is not a panacea because it requires global standardization, and filters can be
based on other fields, such as the source address. Assume the field you add does not require globally
standardized identifiers. What properties of this field must the source ensure?

Solution
Caching (P11a), the old workhorse of system designers, is not very straightforward in this problem. In
general, a cache stores a mapping between an input a and some output f (a). The cache then consists
of a set of pairs of the form (a, f (a)). This set of pairs is stored as a database keyed by values of
a. The database can be implemented as a hash table (in software) or a content-addressable memory
(in hardware). Given input a and the need to calculate f (a), the database is first checked to see if
a is already in the database. If so, the fast path exits with the existing value of f (a). If not, f (a) is
computed using some other (possibly expensive) computation and the pair (a, f (a)) is then inserted
into the cache database. Subsequent inputs with value a can then be calculated very fast.
    In the packet filtering problem, the goal is to calculate the set of receivers associated with a packet
P . The problem is that the output is a function of a (potentially) large number of packet header fields
of P . Thus to use caching, one has to store a large portion of the headers of P associated with the set of
receivers for P . Storing a mapping between 64 bytes of packet header and an output set of receivers is
an expensive proposition. It is expensive in time, since searching the cache can take longer because the
                                                                    4.7 Packet filtering in routers       89




FIGURE 4.13
Adding a flow identifier (which is unique only with respect to a source) can speed up packet filtering.



keys are wide. It is also clearly expensive in storage. The larger storage needs in turn imply that fewer
mappings can be cached for a given cache size, which leads to a poorer cache hit rate.
    The ideal is to cache a mapping between one or two packet fields and the output receiver set. This
would speed up cache search time and improve the cache hit rate. These fields should also preferably
be in the routing header, which routers examine anyway. The problem is that there may be no such field
that uniquely fingerprints packet P .
    However, suppose we are system designers designing the routing protocol. We can add a field to
the routing header. The problem might seem trivial if we could assign each possible stream of packets
a unique global identifier. For example, if we could assign NBC identifier 1, ABC identifier 2, and
CNN identifier 3, then we could cache using the identifier as the key. Such a solution would require
some form of global standards committee responsible for naming every application stream. Even if that
could be done, the receiver filter might ask for all NBC packets from a given source, and the filter could
depend on other packet fields. This leads to the following final idea.
    Change the routing header to add a flow identifier F (Fig. 4.13), whose meaning depends on the
source. In other words, different sources can use the same flow identifier because it is the combination
of the source and the flow identifier that is unique. Thus there is no need for global standardization (or
other global coordination) of flow identifiers. A flow identifier is only a local counter maintained by the
source. The idea is that a sending application at the sender can ask the routing layer for a flow identifier.
This identifier is added to the routing header of all the packets for this application.
    As usual, when the application packet first arrives, the router does a (slow) linear search to deter-
mine the set of receivers associated with the packet header. Because identifiers are not unique across
sources, the router caches the mapping using the concatenation of the packet source address and the
flow identifier as the key. Clearly, correctness depends on the sender application’s not changing fields
that could affect a filter without also changing the flow identifier in the packet.
90        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.14
The LSP of router R1 (with even 500 endnode neighbors) may be too large to fit into a data link frame. Without a
clever idea, this would require inefficient fragmentation and reassembly of the LSP at every hop.



Exercises

• What can go wrong if the source crashes and comes up again without remembering which identifiers
  it has assigned to different applications? What can go wrong when a receiver adds a new filter? How
  can these problems be solved?
• In the current solution, the flow identifier is used as a tip (Chapter 3) and not as a hint. What addi-
  tional costs would be incurred if the flow identifier-source address pair is treated as a hint and not as
  a tip?



4.8 Avoiding fragmentation of LSPs
The following problem actually arose during the design of the OSI and OSPF (Perlman, 1992) link
state routing protocols. This problem is about protocol design, as opposed to protocol implementation
once the design is fixed. Despite this, it illustrates how design choices can greatly affect implementation
performance.
    Chapter 2 and Section 4.3 described link state routing. Recall that in link state routing, a router must
send an LSP listing all its neighbors. The link state protocol consists of two separate processes. The
first is the update process that sends LSPs reliably from router to router using a flooding protocol that
relies on a unique sequence number per LSP. The sequence number is used to reject duplicate copies
of an LSP. Whenever a router receives a new LSP numbered x from source S, the router will remember
number x and will reject any subsequent LSPs received from S with sequence number x. After the
update process does its work, the decision process at every router applies Dijkstra’s algorithm to the
network map formed by the LSPs.
    While a router may have a small number of router neighbors, a router may have a large number of
host computers (endnodes) that are connected directly to the router on the same LAN. For example,
in Fig. 4.14 router R1 has 500 endnode neighbors E1 . . . E500. Large LANs may even have a larger
number of endnodes. This leads to the following problem.
                                                      4.8 Avoiding fragmentation of LSPs               91



Problem
At 8 bytes per endnode (6 bytes to identify the endnode and 2 bytes of cost information), the LSP
can be very large (40,000 bytes for 5000 endnodes). This is much too huge for the LSP to fit into a
maximum-size frame on many commonly used data links. For example, Ethernet has a maximum size
of 1500 bytes and FDDI specifies a maximum of 4500 bytes. This implies that the large LSP must be
fragmented into many data link frames on each hop and reassembled at each router before it can be sent
onward. This requires an expensive reassembly process at each hop to determine whether all the pieces
of a LSP have been received.
    It also increases the latency of link state propagation. Suppose that each LSP can fit in M data link
frames, that the diameter of the network is D, and that the time to send a data link frame over a link is 1
time unit. Then with hop-by-hop reassembly, the propagation time of an LSP can be D · M. If a router
did not have to wait to reassemble each LSP at each hop, the propagation delay would be only M + D.
When the link state protocol was being designed, these problems were discovered by implementors
reviewing the initial specification.
    On the other hand, it seems impossible to propagate the fragments independently because the LSP
carries a single sequence number that is crucial to the update process. Simply copying the sequence
number into each fragment will not help because that will cause the later fragments to be rejected,
since they have the same sequence number as the first fragment. The problem is to make the impossible
possible by shifting computation around in space to avoid the need for hop-by-hop fragmentation.
Changes to the LSP routing protocol are allowed.
Hint: Does the information about all 5000 endnodes have to be in the same LSP? Consider invoking
P3c to shift computation in space.

Solution
If the individual fragments of the original LSP of R1 are to be propagated independently without hop-
by-hop reassembly, then each fragment must be a separate LSP by itself, with a separate sequence
number. This crucial observation leads to the following elegant idea.
    Modify the link state routing protocol to allow any router R1 to be multiple pseudorouters R1a ,
R1b , R1c (see Fig. 4.15). The original set of endnodes are divided among these pseudorouters, so the
LSP of each pseudorouter can fit into most data link frames without the need for fragmentation. For
example, if most data link sizes are at least 576 bytes, roughly 72 endnodes can fit within a data link
frame.
    How is this concept of a pseudorouter actually realized? In the original LSP propagation, each
router had a 6-byte ID that is placed in all LSPs sent by the router. To allow for pseudorouters, we
change the protocol to have LSPs carry a 7-byte ID (6-byte router ID + 1-byte pseudorouter ID). The
pseudorouter ID can be assigned by the actual router that houses all the pseudorouters. By allowing 256
pseudorouters per router, roughly 18,000 endnodes can be supported per router.
    While the LSP propagation treats pseudorouters separately, it is crucial that route computation treat
the separate pseudorouters as one router. After all, the endnodes are all directly connected to R1 in our
example. But this is easily done because all the LSPs with the same first 6 bytes can be recognized as
being from the same router.
    In summary, the main idea is to shift computation in space (P3c) by having the source fragment the
original LSP into independent LSPs instead of having each data link do the fragmentation. This is a
92        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.15
Avoiding hop-by-hop fragmentation by dividing a large router into pseudorouters.



good example of systems thinking. Needless to say, the implementors liked this solution (invented by
Radia Perlman) much better than the original approach.

Exercises

• How can a router assign endnodes to pseudorouters? What happens if a router initially has a lot of
  endnodes (and hence a lot of pseudorouters) and then most of the endnodes die? This can leave a lot
  of pseudorouters, each of which has only a few endnodes. Why is this bad, and how can it be fixed?
• As in the relaxed-consistency examples described in Chapter 3, this solution can lead to some un-
  expected (but not very serious) temporary inconsistencies. Assuming a solution to the previous
  exercise, describe a scenario in which a given router, say, R2, can find (at some instant) that its
  LSP database shows the same endnode (say, E1) belonging to two pseudorouters, R1a and R1c .
  Why is this no worse than ordinary LSP routing?



4.9 Policing traffic patterns
Some network protocols require that sources never send data faster than a certain rate. Instead of merely
specifying the average rate over long periods of time, the protocol may also specify the maximum
amount of traffic, B, in bits a source can send in any period of T seconds. This does limit the source to
an average rate of B/T bits per second. However, it also limits the “burstiness” of the users’ traffic to
at most one burst of size B every T units of time. For example, choosing a small value of the parameter
T limits the traffic burstiness considerably. Burstiness causes problems for networks because periods
of high traffic and packet loss are followed by idle periods.
    If every source meets its contract (i.e., sends no more than the specified amount in the specified
period), the network can often guarantee performance and ensure that no traffic is dropped and that all
traffic is delivered in timely fashion. Unfortunately, this is like saying that if everyone follows the rules
of the road, traffic will flow smoothly. Most people do follow the rules: some because they feel it is the
right thing to do, and many because they are aware of penalties that they have to pay when caught by
traffic police. Thus policing is an important part of an ordered society.
                                                                    4.9 Policing traffic patterns             93




FIGURE 4.16
The naive use of a single or multiple timers (to check whether a flow sends no more than B every T seconds) does
not catch all violations.


     For the same reason, many designers advocate that the network should periodically police traffic to
look for offenders that do not meet their contracts. Without policing, the offenders can get an unfair
share of network bandwidth.
     Assume that a traffic flow is identified by the source and destination addresses and the traffic type.
Thus each router needs to ensure that a particular traffic flow sends no more than B bits in any period
of T seconds. The simplest solution is for the router to use a single timer that ticks every T seconds
and to count the number of bits sent in each period using a counter per flow. At the end of each period,
if the counter exceeds B, the router has detected a violation.
     Unfortunately, the single timer can police only some periods. For example, assume without
loss of generality that the timer starts at time 0. Then the only periods checked are the periods
[0, T ], [T , 2T ], [2T , 3T ], . . .. This does not ensure that the source flow does not violate its contract
in a period like [T /2, 3T /2], which overlaps the periods that are policed. For example, on the left side
of Fig. 4.16, the flow sends a burst of size B just before the timer ticks at time T and sends a second
burst of size B just after the timer ticks at time T .
     One attempt to fix this problem is for the router to use multiple timers and counters. For example,
as shown on the right of Fig. 4.16, the router could use one timer that starts at 0 and a second timer that
starts at time T /2. Unfortunately, the flow can still violate its contract by sending no more than B in
each policed period but sending more than B in some overlapping period.
     For instance, in the right frame of Fig. 4.16 an offending flow sends a first burst of B at the end
of the first period and a second burst of B at the start of the third period, sending 2B within a period
slightly greater than T /2. Unfortunately, neither of the timers will detect the flow as being a violator.
This leads to the following problem.

Problem
Multiple timers are expensive and do not guarantee that the flow will not violate its traffic contract. It is
easy to see that with even a single timer, the flow can send no more than 2B in any period of T seconds.
One approach is simply to assume that a factor-of-2 violation is not worth the effort to police. However,
suppose that bandwidth is precious on a transcontinental link and that a factor-of-2 violation is serious.
How could a violating flow still be caught using only a single timer?
