                                        4.3 Route computation using Dijkstra’s algorithm               81




FIGURE 4.6
Using a priority queue based on bucket sorting to speed up Dijkstra’s algorithm.


cost of a node X is c, then node X can be placed in a list pointed to by element c of the array (Fig. 4.6).
This leads to the following algorithm.
    Whenever a node X changes its cost from c to c , node X is removed from the list for c and added to
the list for c . But how is the minimum element to be found? This can be done by initializing a pointer
called CurrentMin to 0 (which corresponds to the cost of S). Each time the algorithm wishes to find the
minimum-cost node not in the tree, CurrentMin is incremented by 1 until an array location is reached
that contains a nonempty list. Any node in this list can then be added to the tree. The algorithm costs
O(N + Diam ∗ MaxLinkCost) because the work done in advancing CurrentMin can at most be the size
of the array. This can be significantly better than N log N for large N and small values of Diam and
MaxLinkCost.
    A crucial factor in being able to efficiently use a bucket sort priority queue of the kind described
earlier is that the node costs are always ahead of the value of CurrentMin. This is a monotonicity
condition. If it were not true, the algorithm would start checking for the minimum from 1 at each
iteration, instead of starting from the last value of CurrentMin and never backing up. The monotonicity
condition is fairly obvious for Dijktra’s algorithm because the costs of nodes not already in the tree
have to be larger than the costs of nodes that are already in the tree.
    Fig. 4.6 shows the state of the bucket sort priority queue after A has been added to the tree. This
corresponds to the right frame of Fig. 4.5. At this stage, CurrentMin = 2, which is the cost of A. At the
next iteration, CurrentMin will advance to 3, and D will be added to the tree. This will result in the C’s
cost being reduced to 4. We thus remove C from the list in position 5 and add it to the empty list in
position 4. CurrentMin is then advanced to 4, and C is added to the tree.

Exercises

• The algorithm requires a node to be removed from a list and added to another, earlier list. How can
  this be done efficiently?
• In Fig. 4.6 how can the algorithm know that it can terminate after adding C to the tree instead of
  advancing to the end of the long array?
• In networks that have failures, the concept of diameter is a highly suspect one because the diameter
  could change considerably after a failure. Consider a wheel topology where all N nodes have diam-
82       Chapter 4 Principles in action



  eter 2 through a central spoke node; if the central spoke node fails, the diameter goes up to N/2. In
  actual practice the diameter is often small. Can this cause problems in sizing the array?
• Can you circumvent the problem of the diameter completely by replacing the linear array of Fig. 4.6
  with a circular array of size MaxLinkCost? Explain. The resulting solution is known as Dial’s
  algorithm (Ahuja et al., 1993).



4.4 Ethernet monitor using bridge hardware
Alyssa P. Hacker is working for Acme Networks and knows of the Ethernet bridge invented at Acme.
A bridge (see Chapter 10) is a device that can connect Ethernets together. To forward packets from one
Ethernet to another, the bridge must look up the 48-bit destination address in an Ethernet packet at high
speeds.
    Alyssa decides to convert the bridge into an Ethernet traffic monitor that will passively listen to
an Ethernet and produce statistics about traffic patterns. The marketing person tells her that she needs
to monitor traffic between arbitrary source–destination pairs. Thus for every active source–destination
pair, such as A, B, Alyssa must keep a variable PA,B that measures the number of packets sent from A
to B since the monitor was started. When a packet is sent from A to B, the monitor (which is listening
to all packets sent on the cable) will pick up a copy of the packet. If the source is A and the destination is
B, the monitor should increment PA,B . The problem is to do this in 64 µsec, the minimum interpacket
time on the Ethernet. The bottleneck is the lookup of the state PA,B associated with a pair of 48-bit
addresses A, B.
    Fortunately, the bridge hardware has a spiffy lookup hardware engine that can look up the state
associated with a single 48-bit address in 1.4 µsec. A call to the hardware can be expressed as Lookup(X,
D), where X is the 48-bit key and D is the database to be searched. The call returns the state associated
with X in 1.4 µsec for databases of less than 64,000 keys. What Alyssa must solve is the following
problem.

Problem
The monitor needs to update state for AB when a packet from A to B arrives. The monitor has a lookup
engine that can look up only single addresses and not address pairs. How can Alyssa use the existing
engine to look up address pairs? The problem is illustrated in Fig. 4.7.

Hint: The problem requires using P4c to exploit the existing bridge hardware. Since 1.4 µsec is
much smaller than 64 µsec, the design can afford to use more than one hardware lookup. How can
a 96-bit lookup be reduced to a 48-bit lookup using three lookups?
    A naive solution is to use two lookups to convert source A and destination B into smaller
(<24-bit) indices IA and IB . The indices IA and IB can then be used to look up a two-dimensional
array that stores the state for AB. This requires only two hardware lookups plus one more mem-
ory access, but it can require large amounts of memory. If there are 1000 possible sources and
1000 possible destinations, the array must contain a million entries. In practice, there may be
only 20,000 active source–destination pairs. How could you make the required amount of memory
proportional to the number of actual source–destination pairs?
                                                4.4 Ethernet monitor using bridge hardware                        83




FIGURE 4.7
Adapting an engine that does destination lookups to doing source-destination lookups.




FIGURE 4.8
Converting a 96-bit lookup into a 48-bit lookup by first converting each 48-bit address into a 24-bit index and
concatenating the indices.




Solution
As before, first use one lookup each to convert source A and destination B into smaller (<24-bit)
indices IA and IB . Then use a third lookup to map from IA IB to AB state. The solution is illustrated in
Fig. 4.8. The third lookup effectively compresses the two-dimensional array of the naive solution. This
solution is due to Mark Kempf and Mike Soha.

Exercises

• Can this problem be solved using only two bridge hardware lookups without requiring extra mem-
  ory?
• The set of active source–destination pairs may change with time because some pairs of addresses
  stop communicating for long periods. How can this be handled without keeping the state for every
  possible address pair that has communicated since the monitor was powered on?
84        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.9
Demultiplexing in the x-kernel is done by hashing the protocol identifier K and (potentially) using a byte-by-byte
comparison with the key L stored at the hash table entry.



4.5 Demultiplexing in the x-kernel
The x-kernel (Hutchinson and Peterson, 1991) provides a software infrastructure for protocol imple-
mentation in hosts. The x-kernel system provides support for a number of required protocol functions.
One commonly required function is protocol demultiplexing. For example, when the Internet routing
layer IP receives a packet, it must use the protocol field to determine whether the packet should be
subsequently sent to TCP (transmission control protocol) or UDP (user datagram protocol).
    Most protocols do demultiplexing based on some identifier in the protocol header. These identifiers
can vary in length in different protocols. For example, Ethernet-type fields can be 5 bytes while TCP
port numbers are 2 bytes long. Thus the x-kernel allows demultiplexing based on variable-length pro-
tocol identifiers. When the system is initialized, the protocol routine can register the mapping between
the identifier and the destination protocol with the x-kernel. At run time, when a packet arrives the pro-
tocol routine can extract the protocol identifier from the packet and query the x-kernel demultiplexing
routine for the destination protocol. Since packets can arrive at high speeds, the demultiplexing routine
should be fast. This leads to the following problem.

Problem
On average, the fastest way to do a lookup is to use a hash table. As shown in Fig. 4.9, this requires
computing some hash function on the identifier K to generate a hash index, using this index to access
the hash table, and comparing the key L stored in the hash table entry with K. If there is a match, the
demultiplexing routine can retrieve the destination protocol associated with key L. Assume that the
hash function has been chosen to make collisions infrequent.
    However, since the identifier length is an arbitrary number of bytes, the comparison routine that
compares the two keys must, in general, do byte-by-byte comparisons. However, suppose the most
common case is 4-byte identifiers, which is the machine word size. In this case, it is much more efficient
to do a word comparison. Thus the goal is to exploit efficient word comparisons (P4c) to optimize the
expected case (P11). How can this be done while still handling arbitrary protocols?

Hint: Notice that if the x-kernel has to demultiplex a 3-byte identifier, it has to use a byte-by-
byte comparison routine; if the x-kernel has to demultiplex a 4-byte identifier and 4 bytes are the
machine word size, it can use a word compare. The first degree of freedom that can be exploited is
to have different comparison routines for the most common cases (e.g., word compares, long-word
compares) and a default comparison routine that uses byte comparisons. Doing so trades some extra
                                                                4.6 Tries with node compression            85



space for time (P4b). For correctness, however, it is important to know which comparison routine
to use for each protocol. Consider invoking principles P9 to pass hints in interfaces and P2a to do
some precomputation.

Solution
Each protocol has to declare its identifier and destination protocol to the x-kernel when the system
initializes. When this happens, each protocol can predeclare its identifier length, so the x-kernel can use
a specialized comparison routine for each protocol. Effectively, information is being passed between the
client protocol and the x-kernel (P9) at an earlier time (P2a). Assume that the x-kernel has a separate
hash table for each client protocol and that the x-kernel knows the context for each client in order to
use code specialized for thatclient.

Exercises

• Code up byte-by-byte and word comparisons on your machine and do a large number of both types
  of comparisons and compare the overall time taken for each.
• In the earlier ADC solution, the hash table lookup was finessed by passing an index (instead of the
  identifier length as earlier). Why might that solution be difficult in this case?



4.6 Tries with node compression
A trie is a data structure that is a tree of nodes, where each node is an array of M elements. Fig. 4.10
shows a simple example with M = 8. Each array can hold either a key (e.g., KEY 1, KEY 2, or KEY 3
in Fig. 4.10) or a pointer to another trie node (e.g., the first element in the topmost trie node of Fig. 4.10,
which is the root). The trie is used to search for exact matches (and longest-prefix matches) with an
input string. Tries are useful in networking for such varied tasks as IP address lookups (Chapter 11),
bridge lookups (Chapter 10), and demultiplexing filters (Chapter 8).




FIGURE 4.10
Trie storing three keys. Notice the wasted space in the trie nodes.
86       Chapter 4 Principles in action



    The exact trie algorithms do not concern us here. All one needs to know is how a trie is searched.
Let c = log2 M be the chunk size of a trie. To search the trie, search first breaks the input string into
chunks of size c. Search uses successive chunks, starting from the most significant, to index into nodes
of the trie, starting with the root node. When search uses chunk j to index into position i of the current
trie node, position i could contain either a pointer or a key. If position i contains a nonnull pointer to
node N , the search continues at node N with chunk j + 1; otherwise, the search terminates.
    To summarize, each node is an array of pointers or keys, and the search process needs to index
into these arrays. However, if many trie nodes are sparse, there is considerable wasted space (P1). For
example, in Fig. 4.10, only 4 out of 16 locations contain useful information. In the worst case, each
trie node could contain 1 pointer or key and there could be a factor of M in wasted memory. Assume
M ≤ 32 in what follows. Even if M is this small, a 32-fold increase in memory can greatly increase the
cost of the design.
    An obvious approach is to replace each trie node by a linear list of pairs of the form (i, val), where
val is the nonempty value (either pointer or key) in position i of the node. For example, the root trie
node in Fig. 4.10 could be replaced by the list (1, ptr1); (7, KEY 1), where ptr1 is the pointer to the
bottom trie node. Unfortunately, this can slow down trie search by a factor of M, because the search
of each trie node may now have to search through a list of M locations, instead of a single indexing
operation. This leads to the following problem.

Problem
How can trie nodes be compressed to remove null pointers without slowing down search by more than
a small factor?
Hint: Despite compressing the nodes, array indexing needs to be efficient. If the nodes are com-
pressed, how might information about which array elements are removed be represented? Consider
leveraging off the fact that M is small by following P14 (exploit the small integer size) and P4a
(exploit locality).

Solution
Since M < 32, a bitmap of size 32 can easily fit into a computer word (P14 and P4a). Thus null pointers
are removed after adding a bitmap with zero bits indicating the original positions of null pointers. This
is shown in Fig. 4.11. The trie node can now be replaced with a bitmap and a compressed trie node.
A compressed trie node is an array that consists only of the nonnull values in the original node. Thus in
Fig. 4.11, the original root trie node (on the top) has been replaced with the compressed trie node (on
the bottom). The bitmap contains a 1 in the first and seventh positions, where the root node contains
nonnull values. The compressed array now contains only two elements, the first pointer and KEY 3.
This still begs the question: How should a trie node be searched?
    Since both uncompressed and compressed nodes are arrays and the search process starts with an
index I into the uncompressed node, the search process must consult the bitmap to convert the uncom-
pressed index I into a compressed index C into the compressed node. For example, if I is 1 in Fig. 4.11,
C should be 1; if I is 7, C should be 2. If I is any other value, C should be 0, indicating that there is
only a null pointer.
    Fortunately, the conversion from I to C can be accomplished easily by noting the following. If
position I in the bitmap contains a 0, then C = 0. Otherwise, C is the number of 1’s in the first I bits of
the bitmap. Thus if I = 7, then C = 2, since there are two bits set in the first seven bits of the bitmap.
                                                                  4.7 Packet filtering in routers                  87




FIGURE 4.11
Compressing a trie node using a bitmap and bit counting to efficiently translate from an uncompressed index to a
compressed index.


    This computation requires at most two memory references: one to access the bitmap (because the
bitmap is small [P4a]) and one to access the compressed array. The calculation of the number of bits
set in a bitmap can be done using internal registers (in software) or combinatorial logic (in hardware).
Thus the effective slowdown is slightly more than a factor of 2 in software and exactly 2 in hardware.

Exercises

• How could you use table lookup (P14, P2a) to speed up counting the number of bits set in software?
  Would this necessarily require a third memory reference?
• Suppose the bitmap is large (say, M = 64 K). It would appear that counting the number of bits set
  in such a large bitmap is impossibly slow in hardware or software. Can you find a way to speed up
  counting bits in a large bitmap (principles P12 and P2a) using only one extra memory access? This
  will be extremely useful in Chapter 11.



4.7 Packet filtering in routers
Chapter 12 describes protocols that set up resources at routers for traffic, such as video, that needs
performance guarantees. Such protocols use the concept of packet filters, sometimes called classifiers.
Thus, in Fig. 4.12 each receiver attached to a router may specify a packet filter describing the packets
it wishes to receive. For example, in Fig. 4.12 Receiver 1 may be interested in receiving NBC, which is
specified by Filter 4. Each filter is some specification of the fields that describe the video packets that
NBC sends. For example, NBC may be specified by packets that use the source address of the NBC
transmitter in Germany and use a specified TCP destination and source port number.
    Similarly, in Fig. 4.12 Receiver m may be interested in receiving ABC Sports and CNN, which are
described by Filters 1 and 7, respectively. Packets arrive at the router at high speeds and must be sent
88        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.12
Packet filtering in a router may require a slow linear scan of all filters followed by making a copy of the packet for
all filters that match.


to all receivers that request the packet. For example, Receivers 1 and 2 may both wish to receive NBC.
This leads to the following problem.
Problem
Each receiving packet must be matched against all filters and sent to all receivers that match. A simple
linear scan of all filters is expensive if the number of filters is large. Assume the number of filters is
over a thousand. How can this expensive process be sped up?
Hint: One might think of optimizing the expected case by caching (P11a). However, why is caching
difficult in this case? Consider adding a field (P10) to the packet header to make caching easier.
Ideally, which protocol layer should this be added to? Adding a fixed well-known field for each
possible video type is not a panacea because it requires global standardization, and filters can be
based on other fields, such as the source address. Assume the field you add does not require globally
standardized identifiers. What properties of this field must the source ensure?

Solution
Caching (P11a), the old workhorse of system designers, is not very straightforward in this problem. In
general, a cache stores a mapping between an input a and some output f (a). The cache then consists
of a set of pairs of the form (a, f (a)). This set of pairs is stored as a database keyed by values of
a. The database can be implemented as a hash table (in software) or a content-addressable memory
(in hardware). Given input a and the need to calculate f (a), the database is first checked to see if
a is already in the database. If so, the fast path exits with the existing value of f (a). If not, f (a) is
computed using some other (possibly expensive) computation and the pair (a, f (a)) is then inserted
into the cache database. Subsequent inputs with value a can then be calculated very fast.
    In the packet filtering problem, the goal is to calculate the set of receivers associated with a packet
P . The problem is that the output is a function of a (potentially) large number of packet header fields
of P . Thus to use caching, one has to store a large portion of the headers of P associated with the set of
receivers for P . Storing a mapping between 64 bytes of packet header and an output set of receivers is
an expensive proposition. It is expensive in time, since searching the cache can take longer because the
                                                                    4.7 Packet filtering in routers       89




FIGURE 4.13
Adding a flow identifier (which is unique only with respect to a source) can speed up packet filtering.



keys are wide. It is also clearly expensive in storage. The larger storage needs in turn imply that fewer
mappings can be cached for a given cache size, which leads to a poorer cache hit rate.
    The ideal is to cache a mapping between one or two packet fields and the output receiver set. This
would speed up cache search time and improve the cache hit rate. These fields should also preferably
be in the routing header, which routers examine anyway. The problem is that there may be no such field
that uniquely fingerprints packet P .
    However, suppose we are system designers designing the routing protocol. We can add a field to
the routing header. The problem might seem trivial if we could assign each possible stream of packets
a unique global identifier. For example, if we could assign NBC identifier 1, ABC identifier 2, and
CNN identifier 3, then we could cache using the identifier as the key. Such a solution would require
some form of global standards committee responsible for naming every application stream. Even if that
could be done, the receiver filter might ask for all NBC packets from a given source, and the filter could
depend on other packet fields. This leads to the following final idea.
    Change the routing header to add a flow identifier F (Fig. 4.13), whose meaning depends on the
source. In other words, different sources can use the same flow identifier because it is the combination
of the source and the flow identifier that is unique. Thus there is no need for global standardization (or
other global coordination) of flow identifiers. A flow identifier is only a local counter maintained by the
source. The idea is that a sending application at the sender can ask the routing layer for a flow identifier.
This identifier is added to the routing header of all the packets for this application.
    As usual, when the application packet first arrives, the router does a (slow) linear search to deter-
mine the set of receivers associated with the packet header. Because identifiers are not unique across
sources, the router caches the mapping using the concatenation of the packet source address and the
flow identifier as the key. Clearly, correctness depends on the sender application’s not changing fields
that could affect a filter without also changing the flow identifier in the packet.
90        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.14
The LSP of router R1 (with even 500 endnode neighbors) may be too large to fit into a data link frame. Without a
clever idea, this would require inefficient fragmentation and reassembly of the LSP at every hop.



Exercises

• What can go wrong if the source crashes and comes up again without remembering which identifiers
  it has assigned to different applications? What can go wrong when a receiver adds a new filter? How
  can these problems be solved?
• In the current solution, the flow identifier is used as a tip (Chapter 3) and not as a hint. What addi-
  tional costs would be incurred if the flow identifier-source address pair is treated as a hint and not as
  a tip?



4.8 Avoiding fragmentation of LSPs
The following problem actually arose during the design of the OSI and OSPF (Perlman, 1992) link
state routing protocols. This problem is about protocol design, as opposed to protocol implementation
once the design is fixed. Despite this, it illustrates how design choices can greatly affect implementation
performance.
    Chapter 2 and Section 4.3 described link state routing. Recall that in link state routing, a router must
send an LSP listing all its neighbors. The link state protocol consists of two separate processes. The
first is the update process that sends LSPs reliably from router to router using a flooding protocol that
relies on a unique sequence number per LSP. The sequence number is used to reject duplicate copies
of an LSP. Whenever a router receives a new LSP numbered x from source S, the router will remember
number x and will reject any subsequent LSPs received from S with sequence number x. After the
update process does its work, the decision process at every router applies Dijkstra’s algorithm to the
network map formed by the LSPs.
    While a router may have a small number of router neighbors, a router may have a large number of
host computers (endnodes) that are connected directly to the router on the same LAN. For example,
in Fig. 4.14 router R1 has 500 endnode neighbors E1 . . . E500. Large LANs may even have a larger
number of endnodes. This leads to the following problem.
                                                      4.8 Avoiding fragmentation of LSPs               91



Problem
At 8 bytes per endnode (6 bytes to identify the endnode and 2 bytes of cost information), the LSP
can be very large (40,000 bytes for 5000 endnodes). This is much too huge for the LSP to fit into a
maximum-size frame on many commonly used data links. For example, Ethernet has a maximum size
of 1500 bytes and FDDI specifies a maximum of 4500 bytes. This implies that the large LSP must be
fragmented into many data link frames on each hop and reassembled at each router before it can be sent
onward. This requires an expensive reassembly process at each hop to determine whether all the pieces
of a LSP have been received.
    It also increases the latency of link state propagation. Suppose that each LSP can fit in M data link
frames, that the diameter of the network is D, and that the time to send a data link frame over a link is 1
time unit. Then with hop-by-hop reassembly, the propagation time of an LSP can be D · M. If a router
did not have to wait to reassemble each LSP at each hop, the propagation delay would be only M + D.
When the link state protocol was being designed, these problems were discovered by implementors
reviewing the initial specification.
    On the other hand, it seems impossible to propagate the fragments independently because the LSP
carries a single sequence number that is crucial to the update process. Simply copying the sequence
number into each fragment will not help because that will cause the later fragments to be rejected,
since they have the same sequence number as the first fragment. The problem is to make the impossible
possible by shifting computation around in space to avoid the need for hop-by-hop fragmentation.
Changes to the LSP routing protocol are allowed.
Hint: Does the information about all 5000 endnodes have to be in the same LSP? Consider invoking
P3c to shift computation in space.

Solution
If the individual fragments of the original LSP of R1 are to be propagated independently without hop-
by-hop reassembly, then each fragment must be a separate LSP by itself, with a separate sequence
number. This crucial observation leads to the following elegant idea.
    Modify the link state routing protocol to allow any router R1 to be multiple pseudorouters R1a ,
R1b , R1c (see Fig. 4.15). The original set of endnodes are divided among these pseudorouters, so the
LSP of each pseudorouter can fit into most data link frames without the need for fragmentation. For
example, if most data link sizes are at least 576 bytes, roughly 72 endnodes can fit within a data link
frame.
    How is this concept of a pseudorouter actually realized? In the original LSP propagation, each
router had a 6-byte ID that is placed in all LSPs sent by the router. To allow for pseudorouters, we
change the protocol to have LSPs carry a 7-byte ID (6-byte router ID + 1-byte pseudorouter ID). The
pseudorouter ID can be assigned by the actual router that houses all the pseudorouters. By allowing 256
pseudorouters per router, roughly 18,000 endnodes can be supported per router.
    While the LSP propagation treats pseudorouters separately, it is crucial that route computation treat
the separate pseudorouters as one router. After all, the endnodes are all directly connected to R1 in our
example. But this is easily done because all the LSPs with the same first 6 bytes can be recognized as
being from the same router.
    In summary, the main idea is to shift computation in space (P3c) by having the source fragment the
original LSP into independent LSPs instead of having each data link do the fragmentation. This is a
92        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.15
Avoiding hop-by-hop fragmentation by dividing a large router into pseudorouters.



good example of systems thinking. Needless to say, the implementors liked this solution (invented by
Radia Perlman) much better than the original approach.

Exercises

• How can a router assign endnodes to pseudorouters? What happens if a router initially has a lot of
  endnodes (and hence a lot of pseudorouters) and then most of the endnodes die? This can leave a lot
  of pseudorouters, each of which has only a few endnodes. Why is this bad, and how can it be fixed?
• As in the relaxed-consistency examples described in Chapter 3, this solution can lead to some un-
  expected (but not very serious) temporary inconsistencies. Assuming a solution to the previous
  exercise, describe a scenario in which a given router, say, R2, can find (at some instant) that its
  LSP database shows the same endnode (say, E1) belonging to two pseudorouters, R1a and R1c .
  Why is this no worse than ordinary LSP routing?



4.9 Policing traffic patterns
Some network protocols require that sources never send data faster than a certain rate. Instead of merely
specifying the average rate over long periods of time, the protocol may also specify the maximum
amount of traffic, B, in bits a source can send in any period of T seconds. This does limit the source to
an average rate of B/T bits per second. However, it also limits the “burstiness” of the users’ traffic to
at most one burst of size B every T units of time. For example, choosing a small value of the parameter
T limits the traffic burstiness considerably. Burstiness causes problems for networks because periods
of high traffic and packet loss are followed by idle periods.
    If every source meets its contract (i.e., sends no more than the specified amount in the specified
period), the network can often guarantee performance and ensure that no traffic is dropped and that all
traffic is delivered in timely fashion. Unfortunately, this is like saying that if everyone follows the rules
of the road, traffic will flow smoothly. Most people do follow the rules: some because they feel it is the
right thing to do, and many because they are aware of penalties that they have to pay when caught by
traffic police. Thus policing is an important part of an ordered society.
                                                                    4.9 Policing traffic patterns             93




FIGURE 4.16
The naive use of a single or multiple timers (to check whether a flow sends no more than B every T seconds) does
not catch all violations.


     For the same reason, many designers advocate that the network should periodically police traffic to
look for offenders that do not meet their contracts. Without policing, the offenders can get an unfair
share of network bandwidth.
     Assume that a traffic flow is identified by the source and destination addresses and the traffic type.
Thus each router needs to ensure that a particular traffic flow sends no more than B bits in any period
of T seconds. The simplest solution is for the router to use a single timer that ticks every T seconds
and to count the number of bits sent in each period using a counter per flow. At the end of each period,
if the counter exceeds B, the router has detected a violation.
     Unfortunately, the single timer can police only some periods. For example, assume without
loss of generality that the timer starts at time 0. Then the only periods checked are the periods
[0, T ], [T , 2T ], [2T , 3T ], . . .. This does not ensure that the source flow does not violate its contract
in a period like [T /2, 3T /2], which overlaps the periods that are policed. For example, on the left side
of Fig. 4.16, the flow sends a burst of size B just before the timer ticks at time T and sends a second
burst of size B just after the timer ticks at time T .
     One attempt to fix this problem is for the router to use multiple timers and counters. For example,
as shown on the right of Fig. 4.16, the router could use one timer that starts at 0 and a second timer that
starts at time T /2. Unfortunately, the flow can still violate its contract by sending no more than B in
each policed period but sending more than B in some overlapping period.
     For instance, in the right frame of Fig. 4.16 an offending flow sends a first burst of B at the end
of the first period and a second burst of B at the start of the third period, sending 2B within a period
slightly greater than T /2. Unfortunately, neither of the timers will detect the flow as being a violator.
This leads to the following problem.

Problem
Multiple timers are expensive and do not guarantee that the flow will not violate its traffic contract. It is
easy to see that with even a single timer, the flow can send no more than 2B in any period of T seconds.
One approach is simply to assume that a factor-of-2 violation is not worth the effort to police. However,
suppose that bandwidth is precious on a transcontinental link and that a factor-of-2 violation is serious.
How could a violating flow still be caught using only a single timer?
94        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.17
Picking a random gap of T seconds between policing intervals allows the router to catch a violating flow with high
probability.



Hint: Consider exploiting a degree of freedom (P13) that has been assumed to be fixed in the naive
solution. Do the policing intervals have to start at fixed intervals? Also consider using P3a.

Solution
As suggested in the hints, the policing intervals need not be fixed. Thus there can be an arbitrary gap
between policing intervals. How should the gap be picked? Since a violating flow can pick its violating
period of T to start at any instant, a simple idea is to invoke P3a to yield the following idea (Fig. 4.17).
    The router uses a single timer of T units and a single counter, as before. A policing interval ends
with a timer tick; if the counter is greater than B, a violation is detected. Then a flag is set indicating
that the timer is now used only for inserting a random gap. Then the timer is restarted for a random
time interval between 0 and T . When the timer ticks, the flag is cleared and the counter is initialized,
and the timer is reset for a period of T to start policing again.

Exercises

• Suppose the counter is initialized and maintained during the gap period as well as during policing
  periods. Can the router make any valid inference during such a period, even if the gap period is less
  than T units?
• (Open Problem): Suppose the flow is adversarial. What is a good strategy for the flow to consistently
  violate the contract by as high a margin as possible and still elude the randomized detector described
  earlier? The flow strategy can be randomized as well. A good answer should be supported by a
  probabilistic analysis.



4.10 Identifying a resource hog
Suppose a device wishes to keep track of resources, like the packet memory allocated to various sources
in a router. The device wants a cheap way to find the source consuming the most memory so that the
device can grab memory back from such a resource hog. Fig. 4.18 shows five sources with their present
resource consumption of 1, 9, 30, 24, and 7 units, respectively. The resource hog is S3.
                                                           4.10 Identifying a resource hog              95




FIGURE 4.18
Finding the source that is a resource hog.


    A simple solution to identify the resource hog is to use a heap. However, if the number of sources is
a thousand or more, this may be too expensive at high speeds. Assume that the numbers that describe
resource usage are integers in the range from 1 to 8000. Thus bucket sort techniques won’t work well
because we may have to search 8000 entries to find the resource hog.
    Suppose, instead, that the device does not care about the exact maximum as long as the result comes
within a factor of 2 (perfect fairness is unimportant as in P3b). For example, in the figure, assume it is
fine to get an answer of 24 instead of 30. This leads to the following problem.

Problem
A software or hardware module needs to keep track of resources required by various users. The module
needs a cheap way to find the user consuming the most resources. Since ordinary heaps are too slow,
the device designers are willing to relax the system requirements (P3b) to be off by a factor of 2. Can
this relaxation in accuracy requirements be translated into a more efficient algorithm?
Hint: Consider using three principles: trading accuracy for computation (P3b), using bucket sorting
(P14), and using table lookups (P4b, P2a).

Solution
Since the answer can be off by a factor of 2, it makes sense to aggregate users whose resources are
within a factor of 2 into the same “resource usage group.” This can be a win if the resulting number of
groups is much smaller than the original number of users; finding the largest group then will be faster
than finding the largest user. This is roughly the same idea behind aggregation in hierarchical routing,
where a number of destinations are aggregated behind a common prefix; this can make routing less
accurate but reduces the number of routing entries. This leads to the following idea (try to work out the
details before you read further).
   Binomial bucketing can be used, as shown in Fig. 4.19, where all users are grouped into buckets
according to resource consumption, where bucket i contains all users whose resource consumption lies
between 2i and 2i+1 − 1. In Fig. 4.19, for instance, users S3 and S4 are both in the range [16, 31] and
hence are in the same bucket.
   Each bucket contains an unsorted list of the resource records of all the users that fall within that
bucket range. Thus in Fig. 4.19, S3 and S4 are in the same list. The data structure also contains a
bitmap, with one bit for every bucket, that is set if the corresponding bucket list is nonempty (Fig. 4.19).
Thus in Fig. 4.19 the bits corresponding to buckets [1,1], [4,7], [8,15], and [16,31] are set, while the bit
corresponding to [2,3] is clear.
96        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.19
Aggregating users with resource consumption within a factor of 2 leads to a small number of aggregates whose
membership can be represented using a bitmap.


    Thus to find the resource hog, the algorithm simply looks for the bit position i corresponding to the
rightmost bit set in the bitmap. The algorithm then returns the user at the head of the bucket list cor-
responding to position i. Thus in Fig. 4.19 the algorithm would return S4 instead of the more accurate
S3.

Exercises

• How is this data structure maintained? What happens if the resources in a user (e.g., S3) are reduced
  from 30 to 16? What kind of lists is needed for efficient maintenance?
• How large is each bitmap? How can finding the rightmost bit set be done efficiently?



4.11 Getting rid of the TCP open connection list
A transport protocol such as TCP (Stevens, 1994) in computer X keeps state for every concurrent
conversation that X has with other computers. Recall from Chapter 2 that the technical name for the
shared state between the two endpoints of a conversation is a connection. Thus if a user wishes to
send mail from X to another workstation, Y , the mail program in X must first establish a connection
(shared state) to the mail program in Y . A busy server like a Web server may have lots of concurrent
connections.
    The state in a connection consists of things like the numbers of packets sent by X that have not been
acknowledged by Y . Any packets that have not been acknowledged for a long time must be retrans-
mitted by X. To do retransmission, transport protocols typically have a periodic timer that triggers the
retransmission of any packets whose acknowledgments have been outstanding for a while.
    The freely available BSD TCP code (Stevens, 1994) keeps a list of open connections (Fig. 4.20) to
examine on timer ticks in order to perform any needed retransmissions. However, when a packet arrives
at X, TCP at X must also quickly determine which connection the packet belongs to in order to update
the state for the connection. Each connection is identified by a connection identifier that is carried in
every packet.
    Relying on the list to determine the connection for a packet would require searching the entire list,
in the worst case; this could be slow for servers with large numbers of connections. Thus the x-kernel
                                         4.11 Getting rid of the TCP open connection list                          97




FIGURE 4.20
The x-kernel implementation uses a hash table mapping connections to state (for packet dispatching) as well as a
linked list of connections (for timer processing). The redundant state causes dilution of the data cache.


implementation (Hutchinson and Peterson, 1991) added a hash table to the BSD implementation (P15)
to efficiently map from connection identifiers in packets to the corresponding state for the connection.
The hash table is an array of pointers indexed by hash value that points to lists of connections that hash
to the same value. In addition, the original linked list of connections was retained for timer processing,
while the hash table was supposed to speed up packet processing.
    Oddly enough, measurements of the new implementation actually showed a slowdown! Careful
measurements traced the problem to the fact that information about connections was stored redun-
dantly, and this reduced the efficiency of the data cache when implemented on modern processors (see
Chapter 2 for a model of a modern processor). This illustrates question Q3 in Chapter 3, where an ob-
vious improvement to one part of the system can affect other parts of the system. Note that while main
memory may be cheap, fast memory such as the data cache is often limited. Commonly used structures
such as the connection list should float into the data cache as long as they are small enough to fit.
    The obvious solution is to avoid redundancy. The hash table is needed for fast lookups. The timer
routine must also periodically and efficiently scan through all connections. This leads to the following
problem.

Problem
Can you get rid of the waste caused by the explicit connection list while retaining the hash table? It is
reasonable to add a small amount of extra information to the hash table. When doing so, observe that
the original connection list was made doubly linked to allow easy deletion when connections terminate.
But this adds storage and dilutes the data cache. How can a singly linked list be used without slowing
down deletion?
Hint: The first part is easy to fix by linking the valid hash table entries in a list. The second part
(avoiding the doubly linked list, which would require two pointers per hash table entry) is a bit
harder.
   A connection list consists of nodes, each of which contains a connection ID (96 bits for IP)
plus two pointers (say, 32 bits each) for easy deletion. Since the hash table is needed for fast
demultiplexing, the connection list can be removed if the valid hash table entries are linked together
as shown in Fig. 4.21 and a pointer is kept to the head of the list. On a timer tick, the retransmit
routine will periodically scan this list. Scanning the complete hash table is less efficient because
the hash table may have many empty locations.
98        Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.21
Linking the valid hash table entries using forward pointers and lazy deletion. The dashed lines imply connection
records that have been marked as deleted but that will be processed only in the next iteration.


    The naive solution would add two pointers to each valid hash table entry to implement a doubly
linked list. Since these pointers can be hash table indexes instead of arbitrary pointers to memory,
the indexes need not be larger than the size of the hash table: Even the largest hash table storing
connections should require no more than 16 bits, often much less. The naive solution does well,
adding at most 32 bits per entry instead of 160 bits per entry, savings of 128 bits. However, it is
possible to do better and to add only 16 bits per entry. Consider using lazy evaluation (P2b) and
relaxing the specification (P3).

Solution
A doubly linked list is useful only for efficient deletions. When a connection (say, Connection C3 in
Fig. 4.21) is terminated, the delete routine would ideally like to find the previous valid entry (i.e., the
list containing Connection C1 in Fig. 4.21) in order to link the previous list to the next list (i.e., the list
containing C2). This would require each hash table entry to store a pointer to the previous valid entry
in the list.
     Instead, consider principle P3, which asks whether the system requirements can be relaxed. Nor-
mally, one assumes that when a connection terminates, its storage must be reclaimed immediately. To
reclaim storage, the hash table entry should be placed in a free list, where it can be used by another
connection. However, if the hash table is a little larger than strictly necessary, it is not essential that the
storage used by a terminated connection be reused immediately.
     Given this relaxation of requirements, the implementation can lazily delete the connection state.
When a connection is terminated, the entry must be marked as unused. This requires an extra bit of
state, as in P12, but is cheap. The actual deletion of unused hash table entry E involves linking the
                                                     4.12 Acknowledgment withholding                  99



entry before E to the entry after E and also requires returning E to a free list. However, this deletion
can be done on the next list traversal when the traversal encounters an unused entry.

Exercises

• Write pseudocode for the addition of a new connection, the termination of a connection, and the
  timer-based traversal.
• How can we get away with singly linked lists for the lists of connections in each hash table list?
• Hugh Hopeful is always interested in clever tricks that he never thinks through completely. He
  suggests a way to avoid back pointers in any doubly linked list. Suppose a node X needs to be
  deleted. Normally, the deletion routine is passed a handle to retrieve X, which is typically a pointer
  to node X. Instead, Hugh suggests that the handle be a pointer to the node before X in the linked
  list (except when X is the head of the list when the handle is a null pointer). Hugh claims that this
  allows his implementation to efficiently locate both the node prior to X and the node after X using
  only forward pointers. Present a counter-example to stop Hugh before he writes some buggy code.



4.12 Acknowledgment withholding
Transport protocols such as TCP ensure that data is delivered to the destination by requiring that the
destination send an acknowledgment (ack) for every piece of received data. This is analogous to certi-
fied mail. Packets and acks are numbered. Acks are often cumulative; an ack for a packet numbered N
implicitly acknowledges all packets with numbers less than or equal to N .
    Cumulative acks allow the receiver the flexibility of not sending an ack for every received packet.
Instead, acks can be batched (P2c). For example, in Fig. 4.22 a file transfer program is sending file
blocks, one in every packet. Blocks 1 and 2 are individually acknowledged, but blocks 3 and 4 are
acknowledged with a single ack for block 4.
    Reducing acks is a good thing for the sender and receiver. Although acks are small, they contain
headers that must be processed by every router and the source and the destination. Further, each received
packet, however small, can cause an interrupt at the destination computer, and interrupts are expensive.
Thus, ideally, a receiver should batch as many acks as possible. But what should the receiver batching
policy be? This leads to the following problem.

Problem
Ack withholding is difficult at a receiver that is not clairvoyant. In Fig. 4.22, for example, if block 3
arrives first and is processed quickly, how long should the receiver wait for block 4 before sending the
ack for block 3? If block 4 never arrives (because the sender has no more data to send), then withholding
the ack for block 3 would cause incorrect behavior. The classical solution is to set an ack-withholding
timer; when the timer expires, a cumulative ack is sent. This limits the time that an ack can be withheld.
    However, the withholding timer also causes problems. Some applications are sensitive to latency.
Adding an ack-withholding timer can increase latency in cases where the sender has no more data to
send. If the transport protocol could be modified, what information could be added to avoid unnecessary
latency and yet allow acks to be effectively batched?
100       Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.22
The use of cumulative acks allows the receiver to acknowledge several packets with one ack (e.g., blocks 3 and 4)
but introduces the problem of determining a good receiver ackpolicy.


Hint: In an application such as FTP, which software module knows that there is more data to be
sent? For ack withholding, which software module would ideally like to know that there is more data
to be sent? Now consider using P9 and P10.

Solution
In an application such as file transfer, the sender application knows that there is more data to be sent
(e.g., there will be a block 4 after block 3). The sending application may also be willing to tolerate the
latency due to batching of acks. However, it is the transport module at the receiver that needs to know
this information. This observation leads to a simple proposal.
    The sender application passes a bit to the sender transport (in the application–transport interface)
that is set when the application has more data to send. Assume that the transport protocol can be
modified to carry a withhold bit. The sending transport can use the information passed by the application
to set a withhold bit w in every packet that it sends; w is cleared when the sender wants an immediate
ack. The moral, of course, is that it is better for the sender to telegraph his intentions than for the
receiver to make guesses about the future!
    For example, in Fig. 4.23 the sender transport is informed by the sending file transfer application
that there are four blocks to be sent. Thus the sender transport sets the withhold bit on the first three
packets and clears the bit in the fourth packet. The receiver acts on this information to send one ack
instead of four. On the other hand, an application that is latency sensitive can choose not to pass any
information about data to be sent. Note also that the withhold bit is a hint; the receiver can choose to
ignore this information and send an ack anyway. Despite its apparent cleverness, this solution is a bad
idea in today’s TCP. See the exercises for details.

Exercises

• Another technique for reducing acks is to piggyback acks on data flowing from the receiver to the
  sender. To support this, most transport protocols, such as TCP, have extra fields in data packets to
                                               4.13 Incrementally reading a large database          101




FIGURE 4.23
Telegraphing the sender’s intentions using a withhold bit w.


  convey reverse ack information. However, piggybacking has the same classical trade-off between
  latency and piggybacking efficiency. How long should the receiver transport wait for reverse data?
  On the other hand, there are common applications where the sender application knows this infor-
  mation. How could the solution outlined earlier be extended to support piggybacking as well as ack
  batching?
• Recall that Chapter 3 outlined a set of cautionary questions for evaluating purported improvements.
  For example, Q3 asks whether a change can affect the rest of the system. Why might aggressive
  ack withholding interact with other aspects of the transport protocol, such as flow and congestion
  control (Stevens, 1994)?



4.13 Incrementally reading a large database
Suppose a user continuously reads a large database stored on a Website. The Web page can change
and the reader only wants the incremental (P12a) updates since the last read of the database. Thus in
Fig. 4.24 there is a database of highly popular food items that is being read constantly by readers around
the world who wish to keep up with culinary fashion. Fortunately, food fashions change slowly.
    Thus a reader that last read at 2 p.m. and reads again at 6 p.m. only wants the differences: Coke
to Pepsi, and Wheaties to Cheerios. If, on the other hand, a different user reads at 3 p.m. and then at
6 p.m., she, too, only wants the difference: Wheaties to Cheerios. This leads to the following problem.

Problem
Find a way for the database to efficiently perform such incremental queries. One solution is to have the
database remember what each user has previously read. However, it is unreasonable for the database
to remember what each user has previously read, since there may be millions of users. Find another
solution that is less burdensome for the database program.
102       Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.24
A slowly changing database of food items shown at three different times: 2 p.m., 3 p.m., and 6 p.m. Notice that only
the soft drink has changed from 2 to 3 p.m. and that only the cereal has changed from 3 to 6 p.m. Thus a reader who
is constantly monitoring the database wishes to find only the differences from the last time the database was read.




FIGURE 4.25
Solving the incremental-update problem using an update history list.



Hint: If the database does not store any information about the last Read performed by a user, then
it follows that user Read requests must pass some information (P10) about the last Read request
made by the same user. Passing the entire details of the last Read would be overkill and inefficient.
What simple piece of information can succinctly characterize the user’s last request? Now consider
adding redundant state (P12) at the database that can easily be indexed using the information
passed by the user to facilitate efficient incremental query processing.

Solution
As said earlier, user Read requests must pass some information (P10) about the last Read request made
by the same user. The most succinct and relevant piece of information about the last user request is the
time at which it was made. If user requests pass the time of the last Read, then the database needs to be
organized to efficiently compute all updates after any given time. This can be done by storing copies of
the database at all possible earlier times. This is clearly inefficient and can be avoided by storing only
the incremental changes (P12a). This leads to the following algorithm.
                                                            4.14 Binary search of long identifiers                    103



   Add an update history list to the database, with most recent updates closer to the head of the list.
Read requests carry the time T of the last Read, so a Read request can be processed by scanning the
update list from the head to find all updates after T .
   For example, in Fig. 4.25 the head of the update history list has the latest change (compare with
Fig. 4.24) at 6 p.m. from Wheaties to Cheerios and the next earliest change at 3 p.m. from Coke to
Pepsi. Consider a Read request that has a last Read time of 5 p.m. In this case, when scanning the list
from the head, the request processing will find the 6 p.m. update and stop when it reaches the 3 p.m.
update because 3 < 5. Thus the Read request will return only the first update.

Exercises

• If a single entry changes multiple times, a single entry change can be stored redundantly in the
  list, which costs space and time. What principle can you use to avoid this redundancy? Assume the
  database is just a collection of records and that you want each record to appear at most once in the
  incremental list.
• If the number of records is large or the foregoing trick is not adopted, the incremental list size will
  grow very big. Suggest a sensible policy for periodically reducing the size of the incremental list.



4.14 Binary search of long identifiers
The next-generation Internet (IPv6) plans to use larger, 128-bit addresses to accommodate more Internet
endpoints. Suppose the goal is to look up 128-bit addresses. Assume the algorithm works on a machine
whose natural word size is 32 bits. Then each comparison of two 128-bit numbers will take 128/32 = 4
operations to compare each word individually. In general, suppose each identifier in the table is W
words long. In our example, W = 4. Naive binary search will take W · log N comparisons, which is
expensive. Yet this seems obviously wasteful. If all the identifiers have the same first W − 1 words, then
clearly log N comparisons are sufficient. The problem is to modify binary search to take log N + W
comparisons. The strategy is to work in columns, starting with the most significant word and doing
binary search in that column until equality is obtained in that column. At that point, the algorithm
moves to the next word to the right and continues the binary search where it left off.
    Thus in Fig. 4.26, which has W = 3, consider a search for the three-word identifier BMW . Pretend
each character is a word. Start by comparing in the leftmost column in the middle element, as shown
by the arrow labeled 1.1 Since the B in the search string matches the B at the arrow labeled 1, the
search moves to the right (not shown) to compare the M in BMW with the N in the middle location of
the second column. Since N < M, the search performs the second probe at the quarter position of the
second column. This time the two M’s match and the search moves rightward and finds W , but (oops!)
the search has found AMW , not BMW as desired. This leads to the following problem.



1 Many implementors implement binary search to pick the fourth element from the top (i.e., the first B) as the middle and not
the fifth element as we have done. Keep this somewhat unusual convention in mind while following the example.
104       Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.26
Binary search of long identifiers can result in a multiplicative factor of W , the number of words in an identifier. The
naive method of reducing this to an additive factor by moving to the right on equality fails.




FIGURE 4.27
Adding a guard range to every element in a column to allow binary search to work correctly when switching
columns.


Problem
Find some state that can be added to each element in each column that can fix this algorithm to work
correctly in log N + W comparisons.
Hint: The problem is caused by the fact that when the search moved to the quarter position in
column 2, it assumed that all elements in the quarter of the second column begin with B. This
assumption is false in general. What state can be added to avoid making this false assumption, and
how can the search be modified to use this state?

Solution
The trick is to add state to each element in each column, which can constrain the binary search to stay
within a guard range. This is shown in Fig. 4.27. In the figure, for each word like B in the leftmost
(most significant) column, add a pointer to the range of all other words that also contain B in this
position. Thus the first probe of the binary search for BMW starts with the B in BN X. On equality,
the search moves to the second column, as before. However, search also keeps track of the guard range
corresponding to the B’s in the first column. The figure shows that the guard range includes only rows
4 through 7. This guard range is stored with the first B compared (see arrows in Fig. 4.27).
    Thus when the search moves to column 2 and finds that M in BMW is less than the N in BN X,
it attempts to halve the range as before and to try a second probe at the third entry (the M in AMW).
However, the third entry is lower than the high point of the current guard range (4 through 7, assuming
                            4.15 Video conferencing via asynchronous transfer mode                         105



the first element is numbered 1). So without doing a compare, the search tries to halve the binary search
range again. This time the search tries entry 4, which is in the guard range. The search finds equality,
moves to the right, and finds BMW , as desired.
    In general, every multiword entry W1 , W2 , . . . , Wn will store a precomputed guard range. The range
for Wi points to the range of entries that have W1 , W2 , . . . , Wi in the first i words. This ensures that on a
match with Wi in the ith column, the binary search in column i + 1 will search only in this guard range.
For example, the N entry in BN Y (second column) has a guard range of 5–7, because these entries all
have BN in the first two words.
    The resulting search strategy takes log2 N + W probes if there are N identifiers. The cost is the
addition of two 16-bit pointers to each word. Since most word sizes are at least 32 bits, this results in
adding 32 bits of pointer space for each word, which can at most double memory usage. Besides adding
state, a second dominant idea is to use precomputation (P2a) to trade a slower insertion time for a faster
search. The idea is due to Butler Lampson.

Exercise

• (This is harder than the usual exercises.) The naive method of updating the binary search data struc-
  ture requires rebuilding the entire structure (especially because of the precomputed ranges) when
  a new entry is added or deleted. However, the whole scheme can be elegantly represented by a bi-
  nary search tree, with each node having the usual > and < pointers but also an = pointer, which
  corresponds to moving to the next column to the right, as shown earlier. The subtree corresponding
  to the = pointer naturally represents the guard range. The structure now looks like a trie of binary
  search trees. Use this observation and standard update techniques for balanced binary trees and tries
  to obtain logarithmic update times.



4.15 Video conferencing via asynchronous transfer mode
In ATM, the network first sets up a VC through a series of switches before data can be sent. Standard
ATM allows one-to-many VCs, where a VC can connect a single source to multiple receivers. Any data
sent by the source is replicated and sent to every receiver in the one-to-many VC.
    Although it is not standardized, it is also easy to have many-to-many VCs, where every endpoint
can be both a source and a receiver. The idea is that when any source sends data, the switches replicate
the data to every receiver. Of course, the main problem in many-to-many VCs is that if two sources talk
at the same time, then the data from the two sources can be arbitrarily interleaved at the receivers and
cause confusion. This is possibly why many-to-many VCs are not supported by standards, though it is
often easy for switch hardware to support many-to-many VCs.
    Fig. 4.28 shows a simple topology consisting of an ATM switch that connects N workstations.
To showcase the bandwidth of the switch, the system designers have designed a videoconferencing
application. The conferencing application can allow users at any of the N workstations to have a video-
conference with each other. The application should bring up a screen (on every workstation in the
conference) that displays at least the current speaker and also plays the speech of the current speaker.
In addition, in the event of a conversation, it is desirable to see the expressions of the participants. The
designers soon run into the following problem.
106      Chapter 4 Principles in action




FIGURE 4.28
A videoconferencing system that uses an ATM switch with the ability to support many-to-many VCs.


Problem
The naivest solution would use up to N 2 point-to-point connections between every pair of participating
workstations. A better solution is shown in Fig. 4.28. It uses up to N many-to-many VCs between
each participating workstation and the other workstations. The video and speech of each workstation
is connected by a one-to-many VC to every other participating workstation. Thus every participating
workstation gets the video output of all participants and the application can choose which one (or ones)
to display. Unfortunately, the ATM switch requires that bandwidth on the switch be statically divided
among the N one-to-many VCs. Given a minimum bandwidth for video quality of Bmin and a total
switch bandwidth of B, this limits the number of participating workstations to be less than B/Bmin . Is
there a more scalable solution?

Hint: Consider exploiting the switch hardware’s ability to support many-to-many VCs (P4c). However,
to prevent confusion, only one source should transmit at a time in any many-to-many VC. Instead
of developing a complex protocol to ensure such a constraint, what hardware can be added (P5) to
ensure this constraint?

Solution
As suggested in the hint, the designers chose to exploit the many-to-many VC capability of the switch
to replace N one-to-many VCs with a constant number of many-to-many VCs. This allowed the fixed
switch bandwidth to scale to a large number of participants. However, this generic idea requires elab-
oration. How many many-to-many VCs should be used? How is the potential confusion caused by
many-to-many VCs resolved? Here are the details of a solution worked out by Jon Turner at Washing-
ton University.
    First, consider the use of a single many-to-many VC named C. A naive solution to the confusion
problem entails a protocol (say, a round-robin protocol) that ensures that only one workstation at a time
connects its video output to C. Such protocols require coordination, and the coordination adds latency
and expense. Instead, as systems thinkers, the designers observed that, at a minimum, only the current
speaker needs to be displayed.
                           4.15 Video conferencing via asynchronous transfer mode                         107




FIGURE 4.29
Replacing N one-to-many VCs with two many-to-many VCs through the use of a speech detector and a simple
hardware state machine at each input.


    Thus the designers added extra hardware (P5) in the form of a speech detector to the input at each
workstation. If the detector detects significant speech activity at a workstation X, then the detector
connects the video input of X to C; otherwise, the video input of X is not connected to C. Since this
hardware was quite cheap, the extra scalability came at a reasonable price.
    Next, the designers observed that keeping a video image of the last speaker provides visual con-
tinuity in the expected case when there is a dialog between two participants. Thus instead of one
many-to-many VC, they used two many-to-many VCs, C and L, one for the current speaker and one
for the last speaker, as shown in Fig. 4.29.

Exercises

• Write pseudocode (using some state variables) for the hardware at each workstation to update its
  connections to C and L. Assume the speech detector output is a function.
• What happens if more than one user speaks at one time? What could you add to the hardware state
  machine so that the application displays something reasonable? For instance, it would be unreason-
  able for the images of the two speakers to be morphed together in this case.
This page intentionally left blank
