                                                                                       2.2 Hardware             25




FIGURE 2.3
Building a 4-input mux with select bits S0 and S1 from three 2-input muxes. The figure uses the standard trapezoidal
icon for a mux.


enhanced form of priority encoder called a programmable priority encoder (PPE). There is an N -bit
input I as before, together with an additional log N -bit input P . The PPE circuit must compute an
output O such that O[j ] = 1, where j is the first position beyond P (treated as a binary value) that has
a nonzero bit in I . If P = 0, this reduces to a simple priority encoder.
    PPEs arise naturally in switch arbitration (see Chapter 13 for details). For now, suppose a router
connects N communication links. Suppose several input links wish to transmit a packet at the same
time to output link L. To avoid contention at L, each of the inputs sends a request to L in the first time
slot; L chooses which input link to grant a request to in the second slot; the granted input sends a packet
in the third time slot.
    To make its grant decision, L can store the requests received at the end of Slot 1 in an N -bit request
vector R, where R[i] = 1 if input link i wishes to transmit to L. For fairness, L should remember the
last input link P it granted a request to. Then, L should confer the grant to the first input link beyond
P that has a request. This is exactly a PPE problem with R and P as inputs. Since a router must do
arbitration for each time slot and each output link, a fast and area-efficient PPE design is needed. Even
a software designer can understand and possibly repeat the process (Gupta and McKeown, 1999b) used
to design the PPE found in the Tiny Tera, a switch built at Stanford and later commercialized. The basic
idea is reduction: reducing the design of a PPE to the design of a PE (Example 2).
    The first idea is simple. A PPE is essentially a PE whose highest-priority value starts at position P
instead of at 0. A barrel shifter can be used to shift I first to the left by P bits. After this, a simple PE
can be used. Of course, the output-bit vector is now shifted; we recover the original order by shifting
the output of the PE to the right by P bits. A barrel shifter for N -bit inputs can be implemented using a
tree of 2-input multiplexers in around log N time. Thus two barrel shifters and a PE take around 3 log N
gate delays.
    A faster design used in Gupta and McKeown (1999b), which requires only 2 log N gate delays, is
as follows. Split the problem into two parts. If the input has some bit set at position P or greater, then
the result can be found by using a PE operating on the original input after setting to zero all input bits
26        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.4
The Tiny Tera PPE design uses copy 1 of a priority encoder to find the highest bit set, if any, of all bits greater than
P using a mask encoding of P . If such a bit is not found, the output of a second copy of a priority encoder is enabled
using the bottom AND gate. The results of the two copies are then combined using an N-input OR gate.


with positions less than P .4 On the other hand, if the input has no bit set at a position P or greater, then
the result can be found by using a PE on the original input with no masking at all. This results in the
design of Fig. 2.4, which, when tested on a Texas Instrument Cell Library, was nearly twice as fast and
took three times less area than the barrel shifter design for a 32-port router.
    The message here is that the logic design used for a time-critical component of a very influential
switch design can be achieved using simple reductions and simple models. Such models are not beyond
the reach of those of us who do not live and breathe digital design.


2.2.4 Memories
In endnodes and routers, packet forwarding is performed using combinational logic, but packets and
forwarding state are stored in memories. Since memory access times are significantly slower than logic
delays, memories form major bottlenecks in routers and endnodes.


4 This can be done by ANDing the input with P encoded as a mask; such a mask is commonly known in the hardware community
as a thermometer encoding of P .
                                                                                          2.2 Hardware               27



    Further, different subsystems require different memory characteristics. For example, router vendors
feel it is important to buffer 200 msec—an upper bound on a round-trip delay—worth of packets to
avoid dropping packets during periods of congestion. At, say, 40 Gbit/sec per link, such packet buffer-
ing requires an enormous amount of memory. On the other hand, router lookups require a smaller
amount of memory, which is accessed randomly. Thus it helps to have simple models for different
memory technologies. Next, we describe registers, SRAMs, DRAMs, and interleaved memory tech-
nology. Simple implementation models of these memory components can be found in Section A.2.4 in
Appendix.

Registers
A flip-flop is a way of connecting two or more transistors in a feedback loop so that (in the absence of
Writes and power failures) the bit stays indefinitely without “leaking” away. A register is an ordered
collection of flip-flops. For example, most modern processors have a collection of 32- or 64-bit on-chip
registers. A 32-bit register contains 32 flip-flops, each storing a bit. Access from logic to a register on
the same chip is extremely fast, around 0.5–1 nsec.

SRAM
A static random access memory (SRAM) contains N registers addressed by log N address bits A.
SRAM is so named because the underlying flip-flops refresh themselves and so are “static.” Besides
flip-flops, an SRAM also needs a decoder that decodes A into a unary value used to select the right
register. Accessing an SRAM on-chip is only slightly slower than accessing a register because of the
added decode delay. At the time of writing, it was possible to obtain on-chip SRAMs with 0.5-nsec
access times. Access times of 1–2 nsec for on-chip SRAM and 5–10 nsec for off-chip SRAM are
common.

Dynamic RAM
An SRAM bit cell requires at least five transistors. Thus SRAM is always less dense or more expensive
than memory technology based on dynamic RAM (DRAM). The key idea is to replace the feedback
loop (and extra transistors) used to store a bit in a flip-flop with an output capacitance that can store
the bit; thus the charge leaks, but it leaks slowly. Loss due to leakage is fixed by refreshing the DRAM
cell externally within a few milliseconds. Of course, the complexity comes in manufacturing a high
capacitance using a tiny amount of silicon.
    DRAM chips appear to quadruple in capacity every 3 years (Fromm et al., 1997) and are heading
towards 1 gigabit on a single chip. Addressing these bits, even if they are packed together as 4- or even
32-bit “registers,” is tricky. Recall that the address must be decoded from (say) 20 bits to (say) one of
220 values. The complexity of such decode logic suggests divide-and-conquer. Why not decode in two
stages?
    Fig. 2.5 shows that most memories are internally organized two-dimensionally into rows and
columns. The upper address bits are decoded to select the row, and then the lower address bits are
used to decode the column. More precisely, the user first supplies the row address bits and enables a
signal called RAS (row address strobe); later, the user supplies the column address bits,5 and enables

5 Many DRAM chips take advantage of the fact that row and column addresses are not required at the same time to multiplex
row and column addresses on the same set of pins, reducing the pin count of the chip.
28        Chapter 2 Network implementation models




FIGURE 2.5
Most large memories are organized two-dimensionally in terms of rows and columns. Selecting a word consists of
selecting first the row and then the column within the row.


a signal called CAS (column address strobe). After a specified time, the desired memory word can
be read
      √ out. Assuming equal-size rows and columns, this reduces decode gate complexity from O(N )
to O( (N )) at the expense of one extra decode delay. Besides the required delay between RAS and
CAS, there is also a precharge delay between successive RAS and CAS invocations to allow time for
capacitors to charge.
    The fastest off-chip DRAMs take around 40–60 nsec to access (latency), with longer times, such
as 100 nsec, between successive reads (throughput) because of precharge restrictions. Some of this
latency includes the time to drive the address using external lines onto the DRAM interface pins; recent
innovations allow on-chip DRAM with lower access times of around 30 nsec. It seems clear that DRAM
will always be denser but slower than SRAM.

Page-mode DRAMs
One reason to understand DRAM structure is to understand how function can follow form. A classic
example is a trick to speed up access times called page mode. Page mode is beneficial for access patterns
that exhibit spatial locality, in which adjacent memory words are successively accessed. But having
made a row access in Fig. 2.5, one can access words within the row without incurring additional RAS
and precharge delays. Video RAMs exploit the same structure by having a row read into an SRAM,
which can be read out serially to refresh a display at high speed. Besides page mode and video RAMS,
perhaps there are other ideas that exploit DRAM structure that could be useful in networking.

Interleaved DRAMs
While memory latency is critical for computation speed, memory throughput (often called bandwidth)
is also important for many network applications. Suppose a DRAM has a word size of 32 bits and a
cycle time of 100 nsec. Then the throughput using a single copy of the DRAM is limited to 32 bits
every 100 nsec. Clearly, throughput can be improved using access to multiple DRAMs. As in Fig. 2.6,
multiple DRAMs (called banks) can be strung together on a single bus. The user can start a Read to
                                                                               2.2 Hardware            29




FIGURE 2.6
The idea behind RAMBUS, SDRAM, and numerous variants is to create a single chip containing multiple DRAM
parallel memories to gain memory bandwidth while using only one set of address and data lines.


Bank 1 by placing the address on the address bus. Assume each DRAM bank takes 100 nsec to return
the selected data.
    Instead of idling during this 100-nsec delay, the user can place a second address for Bank 2, a third
for Bank 3, and so on. If the placing of each address takes 10 nsec, the user can “feed” 10 DRAM banks
before the answer to the first DRAM bank query arrives, followed 10 nsec later by the answer to the
second DRAM bank query, and so on. Thus the net memory bandwidth in this example is 10 times the
memory bandwidth of a single DRAM, as long as the user can arrange to have consecutive accesses
touch different banks.
    While using multiple memory banks is a very old idea, it is only in the last 5 years that memory
designers have integrated several banks into a single memory chip (Fig. 2.6), where the address and
data lines for all banks are multiplexed using a common high-speed network called a bus. In addition,
page-mode accesses are often allowed on each bank. Memory technologies based on this core idea
abound, with different values for the DRAM sizes, the protocol to read and write, and the number of
banks. Prominent examples include SDRAM with two banks and RDRAM with 16 banks.
Example 4. Pipelined Flow ID Lookups: A flow is characterized by source and destination IP addresses
and TCP ports. Some customers would like routers to keep track of the number of packets sent by each
network flow, for accounting purposes. This requires a data structure that stores a counter for each flow
ID and supports the two operations of Insert (FlowId) to insert a new flow ID, and Lookup (FlowId)
to find the location of a counter for a flow ID. Lookup requires an exact match on the flow ID—which
is around 96 bits—in the time to receive a packet. This can be done by any exact-matching algorithm,
such as hashing.
    However, if, as many router vendors wish to do, the worst-case lookup time must be small and
bounded, binary search (Cormen et al., 1990) is a better idea. Assume that flow ID lookups must be
done at wire speeds for worst-case 40-byte packets at 2.5 Gbits/sec or OC-48 speeds. Thus the chip has
128 nsec to look up a flow ID.
    To bound lookup delays, consider using a balanced binary tree, such as a B-tree. The logic for
tree traversal is fairly easy. For speed, ideally the flow IDs and counters should be stored in SRAM.
