    Facebook is an example of a startup that encouraged tactical programming.
For many years the company’s motto was “Move fast and break things.” New
engineers fresh out of college were encouraged to dive immediately into the
company’s code base; it was normal for engineers to push commits into
production in their first week on the job. On the positive side, Facebook
developed a reputation as a company that empowered its employees. Engineers
had tremendous latitude, and there were few rules and restrictions to get in their
way.
    Facebook has been spectacularly successful as a company, but its code base
suffered because of the company’s tactical approach; much of the code was
unstable and hard to understand, with few comments or tests, and painful to work
with. Over time the company realized that its culture was unsustainable.
Eventually, Facebook changed its motto to “Move fast with solid infrastructure”
to encourage its engineers to invest more in good design. It remains to be seen
whether Facebook can successfully clean up the problems that accumulated over
years of tactical programming.
    In fairness to Facebook, I should point out that Facebook’s code probably
isn’t much worse than average among startups. Tactical programming is
commonplace among startups; Facebook just happens to be a particularly visible
example.
    Fortunately, it is also possible to succeed in Silicon Valley with a strategic
approach. Google and VMware grew up around the same time as Facebook, but
both of these companies embraced a more strategic approach. Both companies
placed a heavy emphasis on high quality code and good design, and both
companies built sophisticated products that solved complex problems with
reliable software systems. The companies’ strong technical cultures became well
known in Silicon Valley. Few other companies could compete with them for
hiring the top technical talent.
    These examples show that a company can succeed with either approach.
However, it’s a lot more fun to work in a company that cares about software
design and has a clean code base.


3.5 Conclusion
Good design doesn’t come for free. It has to be something you invest in
continually, so that small problems don’t accumulate into big ones. Fortunately,
good design eventually pays for itself, and sooner than you might think.
    It’s crucial to be consistent in applying the strategic approach and to think of
investment as something to do today, not tomorrow. When you get in a crunch it
will be tempting to put off cleanups until after the crunch is over. However, this
is a slippery slope; after the current crunch there will almost certainly be another
one, and another after that. Once you start delaying design improvements, it’s
easy for the delays to become permanent and for your culture to slip into the
tactical approach. The longer you wait to address design problems, the bigger
they become; the solutions become more intimidating, which makes it easy to
put them off even more. The most effective approach is one where every
engineer makes continuous small investments in good design.
Chapter 4
Modules Should Be Deep

One of the most important techniques for managing software complexity is to
design systems so that developers only need to face a small fraction of the overall
complexity at any given time. This approach is called modular design, and this
chapter presents its basic principles.


4.1 Modular design
In modular design, a software system is decomposed into a collection of modules
that are relatively independent. Modules can take many forms, such as classes,
subsystems, or services. In an ideal world, each module would be completely
independent of the others: a developer could work in any of the modules without
knowing anything about any of the other modules. In this world, the complexity
of a system would be the complexity of its worst module.
     Unfortunately, this ideal is not achievable. Modules must work together by
calling each others’s functions or methods. As a result, modules must know
something about each other. There will be dependencies between the modules: if
one module changes, other modules may need to change to match. For example,
the arguments for a method create a dependency between the method and any
code that invokes the method. If the required arguments change, all invocations
of the method must be modified to conform to the new signature. Dependencies
can take many other forms, and they can be quite subtle; as one example, a
method may not function correctly unless some other method has been invoked
first. The goal of modular design is to minimize the dependencies between
modules.
     In order to identify and manage dependencies, we think of each module in
two parts: an interface and an implementation. The interface consists of
everything that a developer working in a different module must know in order to
use the given module. Typically, the interface describes what the module does
but not how it does it. The implementation consists of the code that carries out
the promises made by the interface. A developer working in a particular module
must understand the interface and implementation of that module, plus the
interfaces of any other modules invoked by the given module. A developer
should not need to understand the implementations of modules other than the
one he or she is working in.
    Consider a module that implements balanced trees. The module probably
contains sophisticated code for ensuring that the tree remains balanced. However,
this complexity is not visible to users of the module. Users see a relatively simple
interface for invoking operations to insert, remove, and fetch nodes in the tree. To
invoke an insert operation, the caller need only provide the key and value for the
new node; the mechanisms for traversing the tree and splitting nodes are not
visible in the interface.
    For the purposes of this book, a module is any unit of code that has an
interface and an implementation. Each class in an object-oriented programming
language is a module. Methods within a class, or functions in a language that
isn’t object-oriented, can also be thought of as modules: each of these has an
interface and an implementation, and modular design techniques can be applied
to them. Higher-level subsystems and services are also modules; their interfaces
may take different forms, such as kernel calls or HTTP requests. Much of the
discussion about modular design in this book focuses on designing classes, but
the techniques and concepts apply to other kinds of modules as well.
    The best modules are those whose interfaces are much simpler than their
implementations. Such modules have two advantages. First, a simple interface
minimizes the complexity that a module imposes on the rest of the system.
Second, if a module is modified in a way that does not change its interface, then
no other module will be affected by the modification. If a module’s interface is
much simpler than its implementation, there will be many aspects of the module
that can be changed without affecting other modules.


4.2 What’s in an interface?
The interface to a module contains two kinds of information: formal and
informal. The formal parts of an interface are specified explicitly in the code, and
some of these can be checked for correctness by the programming language. For
example, the formal interface for a method is its signature, which includes the
names and types of its parameters, the type of its return value, and information
about exceptions thrown by the method. Most programming languages ensure
that each invocation of a method provides the right number and types of
arguments to match its signature. The formal interface for a class consists of the
signatures for all of its public methods, plus the names and types of any public
variables.
    Each interface also includes informal elements. These are not specified in a
way that can be understood or enforced by the programming language. The
informal parts of an interface include its high-level behavior, such as the fact that
a function deletes the file named by one of its arguments. If there are constraints
on the usage of a class (perhaps one method must be called before another), these
are also part of the class’s interface. In general, if a developer needs to know a
particular piece of information in order to use a module, then that information is
part of the module’s interface. The informal aspects of an interface can only be
described using comments, and the programming language cannot ensure that
the description is complete or accurate1. For most interfaces the informal aspects
are larger and more complex than the formal aspects.
    One of the benefits of a clearly specified interface is that it indicates exactly
what developers need to know in order to use the associated module. This helps
to eliminate the “unknown unknowns” problem described in Section 2.2.


4.3 Abstractions
The term abstraction is closely related to the idea of modular design. An
abstraction is a simplified view of an entity, which omits unimportant
details. Abstractions are useful because they make it easier for us to think about
and manipulate complex things.
    In modular programming, each module provides an abstraction in the form of
its interface. The interface presents a simplified view of the module’s
functionality; the details of the implementation are unimportant from the
standpoint of the module’s abstraction, so they are omitted from the interface.
    In the definition of abstraction, the word “unimportant” is crucial. The more
unimportant details that are omitted from an abstraction, the better. However, a
detail can only be omitted from an abstraction if it really is unimportant. An
abstraction can go wrong in two ways. First, it can include details that are not
really important; when this happens, it makes the abstraction more complicated
than necessary, which increases the cognitive load on developers using the
abstraction. The second error is when an abstraction omits details that really are
important. This results in obscurity: developers looking only at the abstraction
will not have all the information they need to use the abstraction correctly. An
abstraction that omits important details is a false abstraction: it might appear
simple, but in reality it isn’t. The key to designing abstractions is to understand
what is important, and to look for designs that minimize the amount of
information that is important.
    As an example, consider a file system. The abstraction provided by a file
system omits many details, such as the mechanism for choosing which blocks on
a storage device to use for the data in a given file. These details are unimportant
to users of the file system (as long as the system provides adequate performance).
However, some of the details of a file system’s implementation are important to
users. Most file systems cache data in main memory, and they may delay writing
new data to the storage device in order to improve performance. Some
applications, such as databases, need to know exactly when data is written
through to storage, so they can ensure that data will be preserved after system
crashes. Thus, the rules for flushing data to secondary storage must be visible in
the file system’s interface.
    We depend on abstractions to manage complexity not just in programming,
but pervasively in our everyday lives. A microwave oven contains complex
electronics to convert alternating current into microwave radiation and distribute
that radiation throughout the cooking cavity. Fortunately, users see a much
simpler abstraction, consisting of a few buttons to control the timing and
intensity of the microwaves. Cars provide a simple abstraction that allows us to
drive them without understanding the mechanisms for electrical motors, battery
power management, anti-lock brakes, cruise control, and so on.
Figure 4.1: Deep and shallow modules. The best modules are deep: they allow a lot of functionality to be
accessed through a simple interface. A shallow module is one with a relatively complex interface, but not
much functionality: it doesn’t hide much complexity.



4.4 Deep modules
The best modules are those that provide powerful functionality yet have simple
interfaces. I use the term deep to describe such modules. To visualize the notion
of depth, imagine that each module is represented by a rectangle, as shown in
Figure 4.1. The area of each rectangle is proportional to the functionality
implemented by the module. The top edge of a rectangle represents the module’s
interface; the length of that edge indicates the complexity of the interface. The
best modules are deep: they have a lot of functionality hidden behind a simple
interface. A deep module is a good abstraction because only a small fraction of
its internal complexity is visible to its users.
     Module depth is a way of thinking about cost versus benefit. The benefit
provided by a module is its functionality. The cost of a module (in terms of
system complexity) is its interface. A module’s interface represents the
complexity that the module imposes on the rest of the system: the smaller and
simpler the interface, the less complexity that it introduces. The best modules are
those with the greatest benefit and the least cost. Interfaces are good, but more,
or larger, interfaces are not necessarily better!
     The mechanism for file I/O provided by the Unix operating system and its
descendants, such as Linux, is a beautiful example of a deep interface. There are
only five basic system calls for I/O, with simple signatures:
    int open(const char* path, int flags, mode_t permissions);
    ssize_t read(int fd, void* buffer, size_t count);
    ssize_t write(int fd, const void* buffer, size_t count);
   off_t lseek(int fd, off_t offset, int referencePosition);
   int close(int fd);
The open system call takes a hierarchical file name such as /a/b/c and returns an
integer file descriptor, which is used to reference the open file. The other
arguments for open provide optional information such as whether the file is being
opened for reading or writing, whether a new file should be created if there is no
existing file, and access permissions for the file, if a new file is created. The read
and write system calls transfer information between buffer areas in the
application’s memory and the file; close ends the access to the file. Most files
are accessed sequentially, so that is the default; however, random access can be
achieved by invoking the lseek system call to change the current access position.
    A modern implementation of the Unix I/O interface requires hundreds of
thousands of lines of code, which address complex issues such as:

     How are files represented on disk in order to allow efficient access?
     How are directories stored, and how are hierarchical path names processed
     to find the files they refer to?
     How are permissions enforced, so that one user cannot modify or delete
     another user’s files?
     How are file accesses implemented? For example, how is functionality
     divided between interrupt handlers and background code, and how do these
     two elements communicate safely?
     What scheduling policies are used when there are concurrent accesses to
     multiple files?
     How can recently accessed file data be cached in memory in order to reduce
     the number of disk accesses?
     How can a variety of different secondary storage devices, such as disks and
     flash drives, be incorporated into a single file system?

    All of these issues, and many more, are handled by the Unix file system
implementation; they are invisible to programmers who invoke the system calls.
Implementations of the Unix I/O interface have evolved radically over the years,
but the five basic kernel calls have not changed.
    Another example of a deep module is the garbage collector in a language
such as Go or Java. This module has no interface at all; it works invisibly behind
the scenes to reclaim unused memory. Adding garbage collection to a system
actually shrinks its overall interface, since it eliminates the interface for freeing
objects. The implementation of a garbage collector is quite complex, but that
complexity is hidden from programmers.
    Deep modules such as Unix I/O and garbage collectors provide powerful
abstractions because they are easy to use, yet they hide significant
implementation complexity.


4.5 Shallow modules
On the other hand, a shallow module is one whose interface is relatively complex
in comparison to the functionality that it provides. For example, a class that
implements linked lists is shallow. It doesn’t take much code to manipulate a
linked list (inserting or deleting an element takes only a few lines), so the linked
list abstraction doesn’t hide very many details. The complexity of a linked list
interface is nearly as great as the complexity of its implementation. Shallow
classes like linked lists are sometimes unavoidable and they can still be useful,
but they don’t provide much leverage against complexity.
     Here is an extreme example of a shallow method, taken from a project in a
software design class:
   private void addNullValueForAttribute(String attribute) {
         data.put(attribute, null);
   }
From the standpoint of managing complexity, this method makes things worse,
not better. The method offers no abstraction, since all of its functionality is
visible through its interface. For example, callers probably need to know that the
attribute will be stored in the data variable. It is no simpler to think about the
interface than to think about the full implementation. If the method is
documented properly, the documentation will be longer than the method’s code.
It even takes more keystrokes to invoke the method than it would take for a caller
to manipulate the data variable directly. The method adds complexity (in the
form of a new interface for developers to learn) but provides no compensating
benefit.


                     Red Flag: Shallow Module
