                                                                                                       CHAPTER


Introducing network algorithmics
                                                                                                           1
                        What really makes it an invention is that someone decides not to change the solution to a known
                                                                                   problem, but to change the question.
                                                                                                        —Dean Kamen



Just as the objective of chess is to checkmate the opponent and the objective of tennis is to win matches,
the objective of the network algorithmics game is to battle networking implementation bottlenecks.
    Beyond specific techniques, this book distills a fundamental way of crafting solutions to internet
bottlenecks that we call network algorithmics. This provides the reader tools to design different im-
plementations for specific contexts and to deal with new bottlenecks that will undoubtedly arise in the
changing world of networks.
    So what is network algorithmics? Network algorithmics goes beyond the design of efficient algo-
rithms for networking tasks, though this has an important place. In particular, network algorithmics
recognizes the primary importance of taking an interdisciplinary systems approach to streamlining net-
work implementations.
    Network algorithmics is an interdisciplinary approach because it encompasses such fields as ar-
chitecture and operating systems (for speeding up servers), hardware design (for speeding up network
devices such as routers), and algorithm design (for designing scalable algorithms). Network algorith-
mics is also a systems approach, because it is described in this book using a set of 15 principles that
exploit the fact that routers and servers are systems, in which efficiencies can be gained by moving
functions in time and space between subsystems.
    The problems addressed by network algorithmics are fundamental networking performance bottle-
necks. The solutions advocated by network algorithmics are a set of fundamental techniques to address
these bottlenecks. Next, we provide a quick preview of both the bottlenecks and the methods.



1.1 The problem: network bottlenecks
The main problem considered in this book is how to make networks easy to use while at the same time
realizing the performance of the raw hardware. Ease of use comes from the use of powerful network
abstractions, such as socket interfaces and prefix-based forwarding. Unfortunately, without care, such
abstractions exact a large performance penalty when compared to the capacity of raw transmission
links such as optical fiber. To study this performance gap in more detail, we examine two fundamental
categories of networking devices, endnodes and routers.
Network Algorithmics. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-809927-8.00006-3
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                                     3
4         Chapter 1 Introducing network algorithmics



1.1.1 Endnode bottlenecks
Endnodes are the endpoints of the network. They include personal computers and workstations as well
as large servers that provide services. Endnodes are specialized toward computation, as opposed to
networking, and are typically designed to support general-purpose computation. Thus endnode bottle-
necks are typically the result of two forces: structure and scale.
• Structure: To be able to run arbitrary code, personal computers and large servers typically have
  an operating system that mediates between applications and the hardware. To ease the software
  development, most large operating systems are carefully structured as layered software; to pro-
  tect the operating system from other applications, operating systems implement a set of protection
  mechanisms; finally, core operating systems routines, such as schedulers and allocators, are written
  using general mechanisms that target as wide a class of applications as possible. Unfortunately, the
  combination of layered software, protection mechanisms, and excessive generality can slow down
  networking software greatly, even with the fastest processors.
• Scale: The emergence of large servers providing Web and other services causes further performance
  problems. In particular, a large server such as a Web server will typically have thousands of con-
  current clients. Many operating systems use inefficient data structures and algorithms that were
  designed for an era when the number of connections was small.
    Fig. 1.1 previews the main endnode bottlenecks covered in this book, together with causes and so-
lutions. The first bottleneck occurs because conventional operating system structures cause packet data
copying across protection domains; the situation is further complicated in Web servers by similar copy-
ing with respect to the file system and by other manipulations, such as checksums, that examine all the




FIGURE 1.1
Preview of endnode bottlenecks, solutions to which are described in Part 2 of the book.
                                                  1.1 The problem: network bottlenecks                   5



packet data. Chapter 5 describes a number of techniques to reduce these overheads while preserving the
goals of system abstractions, such as protection and structure. The second major overhead is the control
overhead caused by switching between threads of control (or protection domains) while processing a
packet; this is addressed in Chapter 6.
   Networking applications use timers to deal with failure. With a large number of connections, the
timer overhead at a server can become large; this overhead is addressed in Chapter 7. Similarly, network
messages must be demultiplexed (i.e., steered) on receipt to the right end application; techniques to
address this bottleneck are addressed in Chapter 8. Finally, there are several other common protocol
processing tasks, such as buffer allocation and checksums, which are addressed in Chapter 9.


1.1.2 Router bottlenecks
Though we concentrate on Internet routers, almost all the techniques described in this book apply
equally well to any other network devices, such as bridges, switches, gateways, monitors, and security
appliances, and to protocols other than IP, such as FiberChannel.
    Thus throughout the rest of the book, it is often useful to think of a router as a “generic network in-
terconnection device.” Unlike endnodes, these are special-purpose devices devoted to networking. Thus
there is very little structural overhead within a router, with only the use of a very lightweight operat-
ing system and a clearly separated forwarding path that often is completely implemented in hardware.
Instead of structure, the fundamental problems faced by routers are caused by scale and services.
• Scale: Network devices face two areas of scaling: bandwidth scaling and population scaling. Band-
  width scaling occurs because optical links keep getting faster, as the progress from 1-Gbps to
  40-Gbps links shows, and because Internet traffic keeps growing due to a diverse set of new ap-
  plications. Population scaling occurs because more endpoints get added to the Internet as more
  enterprises go online.
• Services: The need for speed and scale drove much of the networking industry in the 1980s and
  1990s as more businesses went online (e.g., Amazon.com) and whole new online services were cre-
  ated (e.g., eBay). But the very success of the Internet requires careful attention in the next decade
  to make it more effective by providing guarantees in terms of performance, security, and reliability.
  After all, if manufacturers (e.g., Dell) sell more online than by other channels, it is important to pro-
  vide network guarantees—delay in times of congestion, protection during attacks, and availability
  when failures occur. Finding ways to implement these new services at high speeds will be a major
  challenge for router vendors in the next decade.
    Fig. 1.2 previews the main router (bridge/gateway) bottlenecks covered in this book, together with
causes and solutions.
    First, all networking devices forward packets to their destination by looking up a forwarding table.
The simplest forwarding table lookup does an exact match with a destination address, as exemplified by
bridges. Chapter 10 describes fast and scalable exact-match lookup schemes. Unfortunately, population
scaling has made lookups far more complex for routers. To deal with large Internet populations, routers
keep a single entry called a prefix (analogous to a telephone area code) for a large group of stations.
Thus routers must do a more complex longest-prefix-match lookup. Chapter 11 describes solutions to
this problem that scale to increasing speeds and table sizes.
6         Chapter 1 Introducing network algorithmics




FIGURE 1.2
Preview of router bottlenecks, solutions to which are described in Parts 3 and 4 of the book.


    Many routers today offer what is sometimes called service differentiation, where different packets
can be treated differently in order to provide service and security guarantees. Unfortunately, this re-
quires an even more complex form of lookup called packet classification, in which the lookup is based
on the destination, source, and even the services that a packet is providing. This challenging issue is
tackled in Chapter 12.
    Next, all networking devices can be abstractly considered as switches that shunt packets coming in
from a set of input links to a set of output links. Thus a fundamental issue is that of building a high-
speed switch. This is hard, especially in the face of the growing gap between optical and electronic
speeds. The standard solution is to use parallelism via a crossbar switch. Unfortunately, it is nontrivial
to schedule a crossbar at high speeds, and parallelism is limited by a phenomenon known as head-of-
line blocking. Worse, population scaling and optical multiplexing are forcing switch vendors to build
switches with a large number of ports (e.g., 256), which exacerbates these other problems. Solutions to
these problems are described in Chapter 13.
    While the previous bottlenecks are caused by scaling, the next bottleneck is caused by the need for
new services. The issue of providing performance guarantees at high speeds is treated in Chapter 14,
where the issue of implementing so-called QoS (quality of service) mechanisms is studied. Chapter 15
briefly surveys another bottleneck that is becoming an increasing problem: the issue of bandwidth
within a router. It describes sample techniques, such as striping across internal buses and chip-to-chip
links.
                                               1.2 The techniques: network algorithmics                      7



    The final sections of the book take a brief look at emerging services that must, we believe, be part of
a well-engineered Internet of the future. First, routers of the future must build in support for measure-
ment, because measurement is the key to engineering networks to provide guarantees. While routers
today provide some support for measurement in terms of counters and NetFlow records, Chapter 16
also considers more innovative measurement mechanisms that may be implemented in the future.
    Chapter 17 describes security support, some of which is already being built into routers. Given the
increased sophistication, virulence, and rate of network attacks, we believe that implementing security
features in networking devices (whether routers or dedicated intrusion prevention/detection devices)
will be essential. Further, unless the security device can keep up with high-speed links, the device may
miss vital information required to spot an attack.



1.2 The techniques: network algorithmics
Throughout this book, we will talk of many specific techniques: of interrupts, copies, and timing
wheels; of Pathfinder and Sting; of why some routers are very slow; and whether Web servers can
scale. But what underlies the assorted techniques in this book and makes it more than a recipe book
is the notion of network algorithmics. As said earlier, network algorithmics recognizes the primary
importance of taking a systems approach to streamlining network implementations.
    While everyone recognizes that the Internet is a system consisting of routers and links, it is perhaps
less obvious that every networking device, from the Cisco GSR to an Apache Web server, is also a sys-
tem. A system is built out of interconnected subsystems that are instantiated at various points in time.
For example, a core router consists of line cards with forwarding engines and packet memories con-
nected by a crossbar switch. The router behavior is affected by decisions at various time scales, which
range from manufacturing time (when default parameters are stored in NVRAM) to route computation
time (when routers conspire to compute routes) to packet-forwarding time (when packets are sent to
adjoining routers).
    Thus one key observation in the systems approach is that one can often design an efficient sub-
system by moving some of its functions in space (i.e., to other subsystems) or in time (i.e., to points
in time before or after the function is apparently required). In some sense, the practitioner of network
algorithmics is an unscrupulous opportunist willing to change the rules at any time to make the game
easier. The only constraint is that the functions provided by the overall system continue to satisfy users.
    In one of Mark Twain’s books, a Connecticut Yankee is transported back in time to King Arthur’s
court. The Yankee then uses a gun to fight against dueling knights accustomed to jousting with lances.
This is an example of changing system assumptions (replacing lances by guns) to solve a problem
(winning a duel).
    Considering the constraints faced by the network implementor at high speeds—increasingly com-
plex tasks, larger systems to support, small amounts of high-speed memory, and a small number of
memory accesses—it may require every trick, every gun in one’s arsenal, to keep pace with the increas-
ing speed and scale of the Internet. The designer can throw hardware at the problem, change the system
assumptions, design a new algorithm—whatever it takes to get the job done.
    This book is divided into four parts. The first part, of which this is the first chapter, lays a foundation
for applying network algorithmics to packet processing. The second chapter of the first part outlines
models, and the third chapter presents general principles used in the remainder of the book.
8         Chapter 1 Introducing network algorithmics




FIGURE 1.3
Getting wind of an evil packet by noticing the frequency of unprintable characters.


   One of the best ways to get a quick idea about what network algorithmics is about is to plunge right
away into a warm-up example. While the warm-up example that follows is in the context of a device
within the network where new hardware can be designed, note that Part 2 is about building efficient
servers using only software design techniques.


1.2.1 Warm-up example: scenting an evil packet
Imagine a front-end network monitor (or intrusion detection system) on the periphery of a corporate
network that wishes to flag suspicious incoming packets—packets that could contain attacks on internal
computers. A common such attack is a buffer overflow attack, where the attacker places machine code
C in a network header field F .
    If the receiving computer allocates a buffer too small for header field F and is careless about check-
ing for overflow, the code C can spill onto the receiving machine’s stack. With a little more effort, the
intruder can make the receiving machine actually execute evil code C. C then takes over the receiver
machine. Fig. 1.3 shows such an attack embodied in a familiar field, a destination Web URL (uniform
resource locator). How might the monitor detect the presence of such a suspicious URL? A possible
way is to observe that URLs containing evil code are often too long (an easy check) and often have a
large fraction of unusual (at least in URLs) characters, such as #. Thus the monitor could mark such
packets (containing URLs that are too long and have too many occurrences of such unusual characters)
for a more thorough examination.
    It is worth stating at the outset that the security implications of this strategy need to be carefully
thought out. For example, there may be several innocuous programs, such as CGI scripts, in URLs that
lead to false positives. Without getting too hung up in overall architectural implications, let us assume
that this was a specification handed down to a chip architect by a security architect. We now use this
sample problem, suggested by Mike Fisk, to illustrate algorithmics in action.
    Faced with such a specification, a chip designer may use the following design process, which illus-
trates some of the principles of network algorithmics. The process starts with a strawman design and
refines the design using techniques such as designing a better algorithm, relaxing the specification, and
exploiting hardware.


1.2.2 Strawman solution
The check of overall length is straightforward to implement, so we concentrate on checking for a
prevalence of suspicious characters. The first strawman solution is illustrated in Fig. 1.4. The chip
                                                  1.2 The techniques: network algorithmics                        9




FIGURE 1.4
Strawman solution for detecting an evil packet by counting occurrences of each character via a count array (middle)
and then comparing in a final pass with an array of acceptable thresholds (left).


maintains two arrays, T and C, with 256 elements each, one for each possible value of an 8-bit character.
The threshold array, T -, contains the acceptable percentage (as a fraction of the entire URL length) for
each character. If the occurrences of a character in an actual URL fall above this fraction, the packet
should be flagged. Each character can have a different threshold.
    The count array, C, in the middle, contains the current count C[i] for each possible character i.
When the chip reads a new character “i” in the URL, it increments C[i] by 1. C[i] is initialized to 0 for
all values of i when a new packet is encountered. The incrementing process starts only after the chip
parses the HTTP header and recognizes the start of a URL.
    In HTTP, the end of a URL is signified by two newline characters; thus one can tell the length of the
URL only after parsing the entire URL string. Thus, after the end of the URL is encountered, the chip
makes a final pass over the array C. If C[ j ] ≥ L · T [ j ] for any j , where L is the length of the URL,
the packet is flagged.
    Assume that packets are coming into the monitor at high speed and that we wish to finish processing
a packet before the next one arrives. This requirement, called wire-speed processing, is very common in
networking; it prevents processing backlogs even in the worst case. To meet wire-speed requirements,
ideally the chip should do a small constant number of operations for every URL byte. Assume the main
step of incrementing a counter can be done in the time to receive a byte.
    Unfortunately, the two passes over the array, first to initialize it and then to check for threshold
violations, make this design slow. Minimum packet sizes are often as small as 40 bytes and include
only network headers. Adding 768 more operations (1 write and 1 read to each element of C, and 1
read of T for each of 256 indices) can make this design infeasible.


1.2.3 Thinking algorithmically
Intuitively, the second pass through the arrays C and T at the end seems like a waste. For example,
it suffices to alarm if any character is over the threshold. So why check all characters? This suggests
keeping track only of the largest character count c; at the end, perhaps the algorithm needs to check
only whether c is over threshold with respect to the total URL length L.
10        Chapter 1 Introducing network algorithmics




FIGURE 1.5
Avoiding the final loop through the threshold array by keeping track only of Max, the highest counter encountered so
far relative to its threshold value.


    This does not quite work. A nonsuspicious character such as “e” may well have a very high occur-
rence count. However, “e” is also likely to be specified with a high threshold. Thus if we keep track only
of “e” with, say, a count of 20, we may not keep track of “#” with, say, a count of 10. If the threshold of
“#” is much smaller, the algorithm may cause a false negative: The chip may fail to alarm on a packet
that should be flagged.
    The counterexample suggests the following fix. The chip keeps track in a register of the highest
counter relativized to the threshold value. More precisely, the chip keeps track of the highest relativized
counter Max corresponding to some character k, such that C[k]/T [k] = Max is the highest among all
characters encountered so far. If a new character i is read, the chip increments C[i]. If C[i]/T [i] > Max,
then the chip replaces the current stored value of Max with C[i]/T [i]. At the end of URL processing,
the chip alarms if Max ≥ L.
    Here’s why this works. If Max = C[k]/T[k] ≥ L, clearly the packet must be flagged, because char-
acter k is over threshold. On the other hand, if C[k]/T [k] < L, then for any character i, it follows that
C[i]/T [i] ≤ C[k]/T [k] < L. Thus if Max falls below threshold, then no character is above threshold.
Thus there can be no false negatives. This solution is shown in Fig. 1.5.


1.2.4 Refining the algorithm: exploiting hardware
The new algorithm has eliminated the loop at the end but still has to deal with a divide operation while
processing each byte. Divide logic is somewhat complicated and worth avoiding if possible—but how?
    Returning to the specification and its intended use, it seems likely that thresholds are not meant to
be exact floating-point numbers. It is unlikely that the architect providing thresholds can estimate the
values precisely; one is likely to approximate 2.78% as 3% without causing much difference to the
security goals. So why not go further and approximate the threshold by some power of 2 less than the
exact intended threshold? Thus if the threshold is 1/29, why not approximate it as 1/32?
    Changing the specification in this way requires negotiation with the system architect. Assume that
the architect agrees to this new proposal. Then a threshold such as 1/32 can be encoded compactly as
                                                 1.2 The techniques: network algorithmics              11




FIGURE 1.6
Using a wide word and a coalesced array to combine 2 reads into one.


the corresponding power of 2—i.e., 5. This threshold shift value can be stored in the threshold array
instead of a fraction.
     Thus when a character j is encountered, the chip increments C[ j ] as usual and then shifts C[ j ]
to the left—dividing by 1/x is the same as multiplying by x—by the specified threshold. If the shifted
value is higher than the last stored value for Max, the chip replaces the old value with the new value
and marches on.
     Thus the logic required to implement the processing of a byte is a simple shift-and-compare. The
stored state is only a single register to store Max. As it stands, however, the design requires a Read to
the Threshold array (to read the shift value), a Read to the Count array (to read the old count), and a
Write to the Count array (to write back the incremented value).
     Now reads to memory—1–2 nsec even for the fastest on-chip memories but possibly even as slow
as 10 nsec for slower memories—are slower than logic. Single gate delays are only in the order of
picoseconds, and shift logic does not require too many gate delays. Thus the processing bottleneck is
the number of memory accesses.
     The chip implementation can combine the 2 Reads to memory into 1 Read by coalescing the Count
and Threshold arrays into a single array, as shown in Fig. 1.6. The idea is to make the memory words
wide enough to hold the counter (say, 15 bits to handle packets of length 32K) and the threshold (de-
pending on the precision necessary, no more than 14 bits). Thus the two fields can easily be combined
into a larger word of size 29 bits. In practice, hardware can handle much larger words sizes of up to
1000 bits. Also, note that extracting the two fields packed into a single word, quite a chore in software,
is trivial in hardware by routing wires appropriately between registers or by using multiplexers.


1.2.5 Cleaning up
We have postponed one thorny issue to this point. The terminal loop has been eliminated while leaving
the initial initialization loop. To handle this, note that the chip has spare time for initialization after
parsing the URL of the current packet and before encountering the URL of the next packet.
    Unfortunately, packets can be as small as 50 bytes, even with an HTTP header. Thus even assuming
a slack of 40 non-URL bytes other than the 10 bytes of the URL, this still does not suffice to initialize
12        Chapter 1 Introducing network algorithmics



a 256-byte array without paying 256/40 = 6 more operations per byte than during the processing of
a URL. As in the URL processing loop, each initialization step requires a Read and Write of some
element of the coalesced array.
    A trick among lazy people is to postpone work until it is absolutely needed, in the hope that it may
never be needed. Note that, strictly speaking, the chip does not need to initialize a C[i] until character i
is accessed for the first time in a subsequent packet. But how can the chip tell that it is seeing character
i for the first time?
    To implement lazy evaluation, each memory word representing an entry in the coalesced array must
be expanded to include, say, a 3-bit generation number G[i]. The generation number can be thought of
as a value of clock time measured in terms of packets encountered so far, except that it is limited to 3
bits. Thus, the chip keeps an additional register g, besides the extra G[i] for each i, that is 3 bits long;
g is incremented mod 8 for every packet encountered. In addition, every time C[i] is updated, the chip
updates G[i] as well to reflect the current value of g.
    Given the generation numbers, the chip need not initialize the count array after the current packet has
been processed. However, consider the case of a packet whose generation number is h, which contains
a character i in its URL. When the chip encounters i while processing the packet, the chip reads C[i]
and G[i] from the Count array. If G[i] = h, this clearly indicates that entry i was last accessed by an
earlier packet and has not been subsequently initialized. Thus the logic will write back the value of C[i]
as 1 (initialization plus increment) and set G[i] to h. This is shown in Fig. 1.7.
    The careful reader will immediately object. Since the generation number is only 3 bits, once the
value of g wraps around, there can be aliasing. Thus if G[i] is 5 and entry i is not accessed until eight
more packets have gone by, g will have wrapped around to 5. If the next packet contains i, C[i] will
not be initialized and the count will (wrongly) accumulate the count of i in the current packet together
with the count that occurred eight packets in the past.
    The chip can avoid such aliasing by doing a separate “scrubbing” loop that reads the array and
initializes all counters with outdated generation numbers. For correctness, the chip must guarantee one
complete scan through the array for every eight packets processed. Given that one has a slack of (say)
40 non-URL bytes per packet, this guarantees a slack of 320 non-URL bytes after eight packets, which
suffices to initialize a 256-element array using one Read and one Write per byte, whether the byte is a




FIGURE 1.7
The final solution with generation numbers to finesse an initialization loop.
                                              1.2 The techniques: network algorithmics                  13



URL or a non-URL byte. Clearly, the designer can gain more slack, if needed, by increasing the bits in
the generation number, at the cost of slightly increased storage in the array.
    The chip, then, must have two states: one for processing URL bytes and one for processing non-
URL bytes. When the URL is completely processed, the chip switches to the “Scrub” state. The chip
maintains another register, which points to the next array entry s to be scrubbed. In the scrub state,
when a non-URL character is received, the chip reads entry s in the coalesced array. If G[s] = g, G[s]
is reset to g and C[s] is initialized to 0.
    Thus the use of 3 extra bits of generation number per array entry has reduced initialization process-
ing cycles, trading processing for storage. Altogether a coalesced array entry is now only 32 bits, 15
bits for a counter, 14 bits for a threshold shift value, and 3 bits for a generation number. Note that the
added initialization check needed during URL byte processing does not increase memory references
(the bottleneck) but adds slightly to the processing logic. In addition, it requires two more chip registers
to hold g and s, a small additional expense.


1.2.6 Characteristics of network algorithmics
The example of scenting an evil packet illustrates three important aspects of network algorithmics.
a. Network algorithmics is interdisciplinary: Given the high rates at which network processing must
   be done, a router designer would be hard pressed not to use hardware. The example exploited several
   features of hardware: It assumed that wide words of arbitrary size were easily possible; it assumed
   that shifts were easier than divides; it assumed that memory references were the bottleneck; it as-
   sumed that a 256-element array contained in fast on-chip memory was feasible; it assumed that
   adding a few extra registers was feasible; and finally it assumed that small changes to the logic to
   combine URL processing and initialization were trivial to implement.
      For the reader unfamiliar with hardware design, this is a little like jumping into a game of cards
   without knowing the rules and then finding oneself finessed and trumped in unexpected ways. A con-
   tention of this book is that mastery of a few relevant aspects of hardware design can help even a
   software designer understands at least the feasibility of different hardware designs. A further con-
   tention of this book is that such interdisciplinary thinking can help produce the best designs.
      Thus Chapter 2 presents the rules of the game. It presents simple models of hardware that point
   out opportunities for finessing and trumping troublesome implementation issues. It also presents
   simple models of operating systems. This is done because end systems such as clients and Web
   servers require tinkering with and understanding operating system issues to improve performance,
   just as routers and network devices require tinkering with hardware.
b. Network algorithmics recognizes the primacy of systems thinking: The specification was relaxed
   to allow approximate thresholds in powers of 2, which simplified the hardware. Relaxing specifica-
   tions and moving work from one subsystem to another is an extremely common systems technique,
   but it is not encouraged by current educational practice in universities, in which each area is taught
   in isolation.
      Thus today, one has separate courses in algorithms, in operating systems, and in networking.
   This tends to encourage “black box” thinking instead of holistic or systems thinking. The example
   alluded to other systems techniques, such as the use of lazy evaluation and trading memory for
   processing in order to scrub the Count array.
14         Chapter 1 Introducing network algorithmics



      Thus a feature of this book is an attempt to distill the system’s principles used in algorithmics
   into a set of 15 principles, which are cataloged inside the front cover of the book and are explored
   in detail in Chapter 3. This book attempts to explain and dissect all the network implementations
   described in this book in terms of these principles. The principles are also given numbers for easy
   reference, though for the most part, we will use both the number and the name. For instance, take a
   quick peek at the inside front cover and you will find that relaxing specification is principle P3 and
   lazy evaluation is P2b.
c. Network algorithmics can benefit from algorithmic thinking: While this book stresses the pri-
   macy of systems thinking to finesse problems wherever possible, there are many situations where
   systems constraints prevent any elimination of problems. In our example, after attempting to finesse
   the need for algorithmic thinking by relaxing the specification, the problem of false positives led
   to considering keeping track of the highest counter relative to its threshold value. As a second ex-
   ample, Chapter 11 shows that despite attempts to finesse Internet lookups using what is called tag
   switching, many routers resort to efficient algorithms for lookup.
      It is worth emphasizing, however, that because the models are somewhat different from stan-
   dard theoretical models, it is often insufficient to blindly reuse existing algorithms. For example,
   Chapter 13 discusses how the need to schedule a crossbar switch in 8 nsec leads to considering sim-
   pler maximal matching heuristics, as opposed to more complicated algorithms that produce optimal
   matchings in a bipartite graph.
      As a second example, Chapter 11 describes how the BSD implementation of lookups blindly
   reused a data structure called a Patricia trie, which uses a skip count, to do IP lookups. The resulting
   algorithm requires complex backtracking.1 A simple modification that keeps the actual bits that
   were skipped (instead of the count) avoids the need for backtracking. But this requires some insight
   into the black box (i.e., the algorithm) and its application.
      In summary, the uncritical use of standard algorithms can miss implementation breakthroughs be-
   cause of inappropriate measures (e.g., for packet filters such as BPF, the insertion of a new classifier
   can afford to take more time than search), inappropriate models (e.g., ignoring the effects of cache
   lines in software or parallelism in hardware), and inappropriate analysis (e.g., order-of-complexity
   results that hide constant factors crucial in ensuring wire-speed forwarding).
      Thus another purpose of this book is to persuade implementors that insight into algorithms and
   the use of fundamental algorithmic techniques such as divide-and-conquer and randomization is
   important to master. This leads us to the following.

Definition. Network algorithmics is the use of an interdisciplinary systems approach, seasoned with
algorithmic thinking, to design fast implementations of network processing tasks at servers, routers,
and other networking devices.

   Part 1 of the book is devoted to describing the network algorithmics approach in more detail. An
overview of Part 1 is given in Fig. 1.8.


1 The algorithm was considered to be the state of the art for many years and was even implemented in hardware in several router
designs. In fact, a patent for lookups issued to a major router company appears to be a hardware implementation of BSD Patricia
tries with backtracking. Any deficiencies of the algorithm can, of course, be mitigated by fast hardware. However, it is worth
considering that a simple change to the algorithm could have simplified the hardware design.
                                                                                        1.3 Exercise           15




FIGURE 1.8
Preview of network algorithmics. Network algorithmics is introduced using a set of models, strategies, and sample
problems, which are described in Part 1 of the book.


    While this book concentrates on networking, the general algorithmics approach holds for the im-
plementation of any computer system, whether a database, a processor architecture, or a software
application. This general philosophy is alluded to in Chapter 3 by providing illustrative examples
from the field of computer system implementation. The reader interested only in networking should
rest assured that the remainder of the book, other than Chapter 3, avoids further digressions beyond
networking.
    While Parts 2 and 3 provide specific techniques for important specific problems, the main goal of
this book is to allow the reader to be able to tackle arbitrary packet-processing tasks at high speeds
in software or hardware. Thus the implementor of the future may be given the task of speeding up
XML processing in a Web server (likely, given current trends) or even the task of computing the chi-
square statistic in a router (possible because chi-square provides a test for detecting observed abnormal
frequencies for tasks such as intrusion detection). Despite being assigned a completely unfamiliar task,
the hope is that the implementor would be able to craft a new solution to such tasks using the models,
principles, and techniques described in this book.



1.3 Exercise
1. Implementing chi-square: The chi-square statistic can be used to find if the overall set of observed
   character frequencies are unusually different (as compared to normal random variation) from the
   expected character frequencies. This is a more sophisticated test, statistically speaking, than the
   simple threshold detector used in the warm-up example. Assume that the thresholds represent the
   expected frequencies. The statistic is computed by finding the sum of
                                                            2
              ExpectedF requency [i] − ObservedF requency [i] /ExpectedF requency [i]

   for all values of character i. The chip should alarm if the final statistic is above a specified threshold.
   (For example, a value of 14.2 implies that there is only a 1.4% chance that the difference is due to
   chance variation.) Find a way to efficiently implement this statistic, assuming once again that the
   length is known only at the end.
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                                                             CHAPTER


Network implementation models
                                                                                                                 2
                       A rather small set of key concepts is enough. Only by learning the essence of each topic, and by
                  carrying along the least amount of mental baggage at each step, will the student emerge with a good
                                                                                  overall understanding of the subject.
                                                                                         —Carver Mead and Lynn Conway



To improve the performance of endnodes and routers, an implementor must know the rules of the
game. A central difficulty is that network algorithmics encompasses four separate areas: protocols,
hardware architectures, operating systems, and algorithms. Networking innovations occur when area
experts work together to produce synergistic solutions. But can a logic designer understand protocol
issues, and can a clever algorithm designer understand hardware trade-offs, at least without deep study?
    A useful dialog can begin with simple models that have explanatory and predictive power but with-
out unnecessary detail. At the least, such models should define terms used in the book; at best, such
models should enable a creative person outside an area to play with and create designs that can be
checked by an expert within the area. For example, a hardware chip implementor should be able to sug-
gest software changes to the chip driver, and a theoretical computer scientist should be able to dream
up hardware matching algorithms for switch arbitration. This is the goal of this chapter.
    The chapter is organized as follows. Starting with a model for protocols in Section 2.1, the im-
plementation environment is described in bottom-up order. Section 2.2 describes relevant aspects of
hardware protocol implementation, surveying logic, memories, and components. Section 2.3 describes
a model for endnodes and network devices such as routers. Section 2.4 describes a model for the rel-
evant aspects of operating systems that affect performance, especially in endnodes. To motivate the
reader and to retain the interest of the area expert, the chapter contains a large number of networking
examples to illustrate the application of each model.


    Quick reference guide
    Hardware designers should skip most of Section 2.2, except for Example 3 (design of a switch arbitrator), Example 4
    (design of a flow ID lookup chip), Example 5 (pin count limitations and their implications), and Section 2.2.5 (which
    summarizes three hardware design principles useful in networking). Processor and architecture experts should skip Sec-
    tion 2.3 except for Example 7 (network processors).
         Implementors familiar with operating systems should skip Section 2.4, except for Example 8 (receiver livelock as
    an example of how operating system structure influences protocol implementations). Even those unfamiliar with an area
    such as operating systems may wish to consult these sections if needed after reading the specific chapters that follow.




Network Algorithmics. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-809927-8.00007-5
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                                          17
18       Chapter 2 Network implementation models




2.1 Protocols
Section 2.1.1 describes the transport protocol TCP and the IP routing protocol. These two examples are
used to provide an abstract model of a protocol and its functions in Section 2.1.2. Section 2.1.3 ends
with common network performance assumptions. Readers familiar with TCP/IP may wish to skip to
Section 2.1.2.


2.1.1 Transport and routing protocols
Applications subcontract the job of reliable delivery to a transport protocol such as the Transmission
Control Protocol (TCP). TCP’s job is to provide the sending and receiving applications with the illusion
of two shared data queues in each direction—despite the fact that the sender and receiver machines
are separated by a lossy network. Thus whatever the sender application writes to its local TCP send
queue should magically appear in the same order at the local TCP receive queue at the receiver, and
vice versa. TCP implements this mechanism by breaking the queued application data into segments
and retransmitting each segment until an acknowledgment (ack) has been received. A more detailed
description of TCP operation can be found in Section A.1.1.
    If the application is (say) a videoconferencing application that does not want reliability guarantees,
it can choose to use a protocol called UDP (User Datagram Protocol) instead of TCP. Unlike TCP, UDP
does not need acks or retransmissions because it does not guarantee reliability.
    Transport protocols such as TCP and UDP work by sending segments from a sender node to a
receiver node across the Internet. The actual job of sending a segment is subcontracted to the Internet
routing protocol IP.
    Internet routing is broken into two conceptual parts, called forwarding and routing. Forwarding is
the process by which packets move from source to destination through intermediate routers. A packet
is a TCP segment together with a routing header that contains the destination Internet address.
    While forwarding must be done at extremely high speeds, the forwarding tables at each router must
be built by a routing protocol, especially in the face of topology changes, such as link failures. There are
several commonly used routing protocols, such as distance vector (e.g., RIP), link state (e.g., OSPF),
and policy routing (e.g., BGP). More details and references to other texts can be found in Section A.1.2
in Appendix.


2.1.2 Abstract protocol model
A protocol is a state machine for all nodes participating in the protocol, together with interfaces and
message formats. A model for a protocol state machine is shown in Fig. 2.1. The specification must
describe how the state machine changes state and responds (e.g., by sending messages, setting timers)
to interface calls, received messages, and timer events.
    For instance, when an application makes a connect request, the TCP sender state machine initializes
by picking an unused initial sequence number, goes to the so-called SYN-SENT state, and sends a
SYN message. As a second example, a link-state routing protocol like OSPF has a state machine at
each router; when a link state packet (LSP) arrives at a router with a higher sequence number than the
last LSP from the source, the new LSP should be stored and sent to all neighbors. While the LSP is very
different from TCP, both protocols can be abstracted by the state machine model shown in Fig. 2.1.
